ABT-267
see ombitasvir/VIEKIRA PAK

ABT-333
see dasabuvir/VIEKIRA PAK

ABT-450
see paritaprevir/VIEKIRA PAK

ADVERSE EVENT
 an unwanted side effect of a medication.

ABDOMEN
(adjective ABDOMINAL) the area of the body between the chest and pelvis. 

ABSORPTION
the passage of nutrients, drugs, or water from the intestines into the bloodstream.

ABSTRACT
a written summary of the important points of a medical article. 

ACCELERATE
speed up. 

ACCELERATED APPROVAL
FDA regulations governing early marketing approval of promising drugs for life-threatening illnesses. 

ACETAMINOPHEN
(also known as paracetamol) an analgesic drug used to relieve pain and reduce fever. Tylenol is the most well-known brand name. 

AIDS
a syndrome characterized by suppression of the immune system, rendering the body susceptible to various illnesses; the late, symptomatic stage of HIV disease. 

ACTIGALL
see ursodiol.

ACTIVE INFECTION
an infection in which a disease-causing microorganism is actively replicating and infecting new cells. 

ACUPRESSURE
a traditional Chinese healing technique in which finger pressure is applied to specific points on the body to treat disease and alleviate symptoms. 

ACUPUNCTURE
a traditional Chinese healing technique that involves inserting thin needles into different acupuncture points on the body. Acupuncture is believed to improve the flow of qi, the body's vital energy; it is used for many conditions, including pain and addiction. 

ACUTE
rapid-onset, short-term initial stage of a disease. Contrast with chronic. 

ACUTE HBV
Initial infection with hepatitis  B. 

ACUTE HEPATITIS
the initial stage of viral hepatitis following infection. In HCV, acute hepatitis refers to the first six months of infection. 

ADA
see Americans with Disabilities Act.

ADEFOVIR
((ADV) brand name HEPSERA) A nucleoside analogue that is used to treat chronic hepatitis  B. Adefovir is not recommended as a first line of HBV treatment because of the high rate of drug resistance. 

ADDITIVE EFFECT
the combined effect of several drugs that is the sum of the effects that would be produced by each of the drugs in the absence of the others. 

ADHERENCE
following a prescribed treatment regimen, including correct dosage, timing, and number of doses per day. 

ADJUNCT THERAPY
therapy given in addition to a primary treatment. 

ADRENAL GLAND
one of a pair of glands located above the kidneys. The adrenal medulla produces hormones such as adrenaline  (epinephrine), while the adrenal cortex produces corticosteroids and androgens. 

ADVERSE REACTION
(SIDE EFFECT)an undesired action or effect of a drug or other treatment. 

AEROBIC EXERCISE
a type of exercise  (e.g., running, swimming) that makes the heart and lungs work harder to supply the muscles with oxygen. 

AFP
see alpha-fetoprotein. 

AIDS
see acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 

ALANINE AMINOTRANSFERASE
(ALT; formerly SGPT) an enzyme (also called alanine transaminase) produced in the liver when the membranes of liver cells break down. ALT levels are measured to help assess the degree of liver damage and determine how well HCV treatment is working. A normal level is below 48 IU/L. 

ALBUMIN
a blood protein produced by the liver that plays a role in maintaining normal blood volume. A low albumin level is associated with liver cirrhosis. A normal level is 3.2 to 5.0g. 

ALCOHOLISM
a disorder characterized by excessive consumption of and dependence on alcohol. 

ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE
(AP) an enzyme found in various body tissues and fluids. Abnormal alkaline phosphatase levels are associated with liver disease and bone and muscle damage. A normal level is 35 to 125 IU/L. 

ALKALOID
an organic compound found in plants. 

ALLERGY
an abnormal immune response to an antigen (allergen) that does not normally cause an adverse reaction (e.g., animal dander, pollen). Allergic reactions are caused by the release of histamine by mast cells, a type of white blood cell. Allergic symptoms may include runny nose (rhinitis), skin rash, asthma, and anaphylactic shock. 

ALLOGRAFT
a transplant of genetically matched cells, tissues, or organs between two members of the same species. 

ALLOPATHY
(adjective ALLOPATHIC) Western medicine; the conventional medical practices used most often in the U.S. 

ALOPECIA
hair loss. 

ALPHA INTERFERON
see interferon-alpha. 

ALPHA-FETOPROTEIN
(AFP)  a protein, measurable in the blood, that is often elevated in people with liver cancer.

ALPHA LIPOIC ACID
(THIOCTIC ACID)  a compound that enhances the antioxidant effect of vitamin C and vitamin E, and may help reduce liver inflammation and protect liver cells from damage.

ALT
see alanine aminotransferase. 

ALTERNATIVE THERAPY
any type of treatment that is not considered standard or conventional practice in a given culture. In Western countries, traditional Chinese medicine, homeopathy, naturopathy, and chiropractic are considered alternative therapies.

AMENORRHEA
absence of menstrual periods. 

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITY ACT
(ADA)  a federal law that requires employers to offer certain protections and benefits (including "reasonable accommodation") to persons with disabilities that substantially limits major life activities. 

AMINO ACID
an organic compound that is a basic structural unit of peptides and proteins. There are over 100 amino acids, eight of which are essential for human metabolism. 

AMINOTRANSFERASE
(TRANSAMINASE) an enzyme (e.g., ALT,  AST) produced by the liver that catalyzes the transfer of amino acids. Abnormally high aminotransferase levels in the blood suggest liver damage. 

AMMONIA
a toxic metabolic byproduct that is normally excreted in the urine. 

AMNESIA
memory loss. 

AMPLICOR/COBALT AMPLICOR
brand name of a PCR-based viral load test for HCV and HIV. 

ANA
see antinuclear antibody

ANALGESIC
a drug or therapy that reduces pain. 

ANALINGUS
(RIMMING) oral/anal sex. 

ANECDOTAL
evidence based on reports of specific individual cases rather than controlled clinical studies. 

ANEMIA
(adjective ANEMIC) reduced number of red blood cells or reduced ability of blood to carry oxygen. There are several types of anemia, all with different causes. Symptoms may include fatigue, weakness, pale skin, and difficulty breathing. 

ANESTHESIA
(adjective ANESTHETIC) an agent that controls pain. Localized anesthesia blocks pain in a given area; general anesthesia produces unconsciousness. 

ANEURYSM
an abnormally stretched, dilated section of a blood vessel that is prone to bursting. 

ANGINA PECTORIS
chest pain that occurs when the heart muscle receives inadequate oxygen. 

ANOREXIA
loss of appetite for food. 

ANTIBIOTIC
an agent that kills or inhibits the growth of bacteria. 

ANTIBODY
(IMMUNOGLOBULIN) a protein produced by plasma cells (a type of immune system white blood cell) when they encounter foreign invaders. Specific antibodies bind to specific invaders, or antigens, and target them for destruction. The presence of antibodies indicates current infection with or past exposure to a pathogen. 

ANTIBODY POSITIVE
(SEROPOSITIVE) the presence in the blood of antibodies against a specific pathogen such as HCV. 

ANTIBODY TEST
an assay that detects the presence of antibodies in a blood sample; ELISA and RIBA tests are used to detect HCV antibodies. 

ANTICOAGULANT
a drug that reduces or delays blood coagulation or clotting. 

ANTICONVULSANT
a drug that prevents or reduces convulsions or seizures. 

ANTIDEPRESSANT
a drug that elevates the mood and alleviates mental depression. There are several types, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI's), MAO inhibitors, and tricyclics. 

ANTIEMETIC
a drug that relieves nausea and vomiting. 

ANTIFIBROTIC
a drug or other agent than prevents or reduces the development of liver fibrosis or cirrhosis. 

ANTIGEN
any agent or substance that stimulates an immune response. Antigens are often foreign invaders such as bacteria or viruses. 

ANTIHISTAMINE
a drug that blocks the action of histamine, a chemical messenger in the body. Antihistamines are used to prevent or alleviate allergic reactions and to reduce stomach acid production.

ANTINUCLEAR ANTIBODY
An antibody that attacks cell nuclei. 

ANTIOXIDANT
a substance that reduces oxidation by binding with and neutralizing free radicals. The body produces natural antioxidants, and they are also available in foods and dietary supplements (e.g., vitamin E, selenium). 

ANTIRETROVIRAL
a drug that suppresses the activity or replication of retroviruses. Different types of antiretroviral drugs (e.g., reverse transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors) interfere with various stages of the virus life cycle. 

ANTISENSE COMPOUNDS
Compounds that target gene sequences associated with diseases to interfere with the disease process.

ANTISENSE OLIGONUCLEOTIDE
an agent that blocks the synthesis of disease-causing proteins by binding with and preventing translation of RNA (genetic material). HCV antisense oligodeoxynucleotides are directed against a specific HCV genetic sequence and inhibit viral gene expression. 

ANTIVIRAL
a drug that suppresses the activity or replication of viruses. 

ANXIOLYTIC
a drug that helps relieve mental anxiety. 

APLASTIC ANEMIA
anemia due to a reduced level of red blood cells caused by the inability of stem cells in the bone marrow to produce new cells. Certain drugs suppress the bone marrow and can lead to aplastic anemia as a side effect. 

ARM
a group of participants in a clinical trial who receive the same treatment (or placebo). 

ARTERIOGRAPHY 
(ANGIOGRAPHY) examination of arteries (after injection of a dye) to look for damage and blockages. 

ARTHRALGIA
joint pain. 

ARTHRITIS
joint inflammation. 

ASCITES
accumulation of fluid in the abdominal (peritoneal) cavity. Ascites may be a symptom of advanced liver disease with decompensated cirrhosis. 

ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASE 
(AST, formerly SGOT) an enzyme (also called aspartate transaminase) produced in the liver. When liver cells are damaged, AST is released. Elevated levels may indicate liver disease, but are also seen in people with muscle damage. A normal level is below 42 IU/L. 

ASSAY
a test, especially one used to detect the presence or amount of an agent in the blood or body tissues. 

AST
see aspartate aminotransferase. 

ASTRAGALUS
an herb used to stimulate the immune system. It is an ingredient in many Chinese herbal formulas.

AS-TREATED ANALYSIS
a method of analyzing the results of a clinical trial that includes only participants who successfully complete a course of the treatment, excluding those who drop out early. Contrast with intent-to-treat analysis. 

ASYMPTOMATIC
not feeling or showing outward symptoms or signs of a disease. 

ATHEROSCLEROSIS
a condition in which blood vessels harden and lose their elasticity due to the build-up of fatty material (plaques).

AUTOANTIBODY
an antibody that targets the body's own tissues. 

AUTOIMMUNE RESPONSE 
(AUTOIMMUNITY) a condition in which a person's immune system produces antibodies that attack the body's own tissues. Several conditions associated with hepatitis C (e.g., lichen planus, Sjögren's syndrome) appear to have an autoimmune aspect. 

AUTOIMMUNE THYROIDITIS
an inflammatory, autoimmune condition in which the immune system attacks the thyroid gland. 

AYURVEDA
a system of traditional medicine practiced in India.

BACTERIUM (plural BACTERIA) a simple single-celled microorganism. Bacteria are classified by their shape (e.g., rod, spirochete), staining properties (Gram positive or Gram negative) and habitat (aerobic, anaerobic). 

BASELINE
an initial or known value (e.g., ALT level, HCV viral load) against which later measurements can be compared. 

B-CELL (B-LYMPHOCYTE) a type of immune system white blood cell. B-cells mature into plasma cells that produce antibodies. 

bDNA
see branched-chain DNA assay. 

BECK DEPRESSION INDEX
a written, self-report questionnaire used to gauge clinical depression. 

BEHCET'S DISEASE
a disease that presents as ulcerations in the eyes, mouth and genitals but can affect any organ of the body.

BENIGN
a mild, non-lethal illness, especially a non-cancerous tumor. Contrast with malignant. 

BIAS
in a clinical trial, a false association that results from the failure to account for some skewing or influencing factor. 

BID
taken twice daily. 

BILE
a yellowish-green fluid produced by the liver that aids in the digestion of fats and the excretion of toxins. 

BILE DUCT
the passage that carries bile from the liver to the small intestine. 

BILIRUBIN
a yellowish pigment released when red blood cells are broken down. Normally bilirubin is processed and excreted by the liver. An excess level of bilirubin in the blood (hyperbilirubinemia) may indicate liver damage, and can lead to jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes), pale-colored stools, and dark urine. A normal bilirubin level is below 1.3mg. 

BINDING PROTEIN
a protein synthesized by the liver that binds to and transports substances such as vitamins, minerals, hormones, and fats. 

BIOAVAILABILITY
the degree to which a drug or other substance is absorbed and circulated in the body. 

BIOCHEMICAL RESPONSE 
(BIOLOGICAL RESPONSE) a favorable response to treatment as indicated by normalization of blood values (e.g., liver enzyme levels). 

BIOFEEDBACK
a technique in which people learn to use signals from their own bodies to influence physiological functions. 

BIOFLAVINOID (VITAMIN P) natural pigments found in fruits and vegetables that increase absorption of vitamin C.

BIOLOGICAL RESPONSE
see biochemical response. 

BIOPSY (BX) a procedure in which a sample of cells or tissue is taken for laboratory examination. Liver biopsies are used to monitor liver disease progression in people with HCV. 

BLINDING
a method of conducting clinical trials in which participants do not know who is taking an experimental treatment, a standard (control) treatment, or a placebo. In a blinded study, the volunteers do not know what treatment (if any) they are receiving. In a double-blind study, neither the volunteers nor the researchers administering the treatment know who is receiving what. Blinding is done to reduce bias in drug trials. In the case of medical necessity, a study may be unblinded to reveal who is receiving what treatment. 

BLOOD-BORNE
a pathogen that is transmitted through direct blood-to-blood contact, for example, through sharing dirty needles or through a blood transfusion. 

BLOOD TRANSFUSION
the infusion of blood or blood components into an individual for the treatment of a medical condition. Transfusions may be homologous (from a donor) or autologous (previously stored blood from the recipient). 

BMI
see body mass index.

BOCEPREVIR 
(Victrelis) HCV protease inhibitor taken in combination with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin previously used to hepatitis C. 

BODY MASS INDEX (BMI) a measurement of body fat determined by dividing a person's weight (in kilograms) by height (in meters squared). 

BODYWORK
healing techniques (e.g., massage therapy, reflexology) that involve manipulating or applying pressure to the body. 

BONE MARROW
the soft, spongy material inside certain long bones where blood cells are produced. 

BRAIN FOG
mild mental confusion, memory loss, and/or lack of concentration and alertness. May be a symptom of toxic chemical build-up due to impaired liver function. See hepatic encephalopathy. 

BRANCHED-CHAIN DNA ASSAY (bDNA) a test that measures the amount of virus (viral load) in plasma or tissues using a chemical signal emitted by viral genetic material. 

BREAKTHROUGH
the return of detectable viral load or high ALT levels in a person who had previously achieved a good virological or biochemical treatment response. 

BUDDING
the emergence of newly produced virus particles through a host cell membrane. 

BUN
(Blood urea nitrogen) a test that measures the amount of a certain waste product (nitrogen) excreted by the kidneys. 

BUPLEURUM
an herb traditionally used in Chinese medicine to treat liver conditions.

BX
see Biopsy.

CADAVER
the body of a dead person. 

CADAVERIC DONOR
a recently deceased person who has donated an organ or tissue. 

CANCER
a malignant neoplasm or tumor characterized by abnormal cell proliferation. Types include carcinoma (which affects epithelial cells), sarcoma (which affects soft tissues), lymphoma and leukemia (which affect lymphoid tissue), and glioma (which affects brain tissue). 

CANITIES
a condition that causes premature graying of the hair.

CAPILLARIES
tiny blood vessels that deliver oxygen and nutrients to and remove waste products from cells. 

CARBOHYDRATE
an organic molecule composed mainly of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. Carbohydrates constitutes a major class of nutrients, and are present in foods such as bread and pasta. 

CARCINOGEN
an agent that promotes the development of cancer. 

CARCINOMA
a malignant tumor of the epithelial cells that line body surfaces and cavities. Carcinoma in situ refers to an early stage of cancer that has not invaded surrounding tissues. 

CARDIAC
having to do with the heart. 

CARDIOVASCULAR
having to do with the circulatory system (the heart and blood vessels). 

CARRIER
a person who does not show symptoms or have active disease, but who carries an infectious organism and can transmit it to others. 

CASE STUDY
a description of a specific clinical case, that is, the development of disease and response to treatment in a single individual.

CASUAL CONTACT
non-intimate contact between individuals (e.g., hugging, eating, working together) that does not involve transfer of body fluids and therefore does not pose a risk for transmission of blood-borne diseases. 

CATEGORY A, B, C, D, X
an FDA classification for drug safety during pregnancy. Category A drugs have not shown a risk to fetuses in controlled studies. Category X includes drugs which animal and human studies or common experience have shown to cause fetal abnormalities or miscarriages. 

CBC
see complete blood count.

CD4 CELL
(CD4 LYMPHOCYTE, T-HELPER CELL) a type of white blood cell that helps the body fight infection. 

CD4 CELL COUNT
the number of CD4 lymphocytes in one cubic millimeter (mm3) of blood. The CD4 count is one indicator of the progression of HIV disease. A CD4 count below 200 cells/mm3 is a diagnostic criteria for AIDS. 

CD8 CELL (CD8 LYMPHOCYTE) a type of white blood cell that helps regulate and/or carry out the body's immune response. CD8 cells include T-suppressor cells and cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. 

CDC
see Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

CELL
the basic unit of living organisms. A cell contains a nucleus and a cell wall (in plants) or a cell membrane (in animals) which surrounds the cellular material, called cytoplasm. 

CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
(CDC) the U.S. federal government agency within the Department of Health and Human Services that monitors the occurrence of diseases and develops policies for preventing disease and maintaining the health of the population. 

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS) the brain and spinal cord. 

CEPLENE
see histamine dihydrochloride.

CEREBRAL VASCULITIS a disorder characterized by inflammation and cell death in arteries.

CEREBROVASCULAR
having to do with the flow of blood to the brain. 

CEREBROVASCULAR ACCIDENT
see stroke. 

CESAREAN SECTION (C-SECTION) a delivery procedure that involves making an incision through the abdominal wall to remove an infant from the uterus (womb). 

cEVR
see complete early virological response. 

CFIDS
chronic fatigue immune dysfunction syndrome. See chronic fatigue syndrome. 

CHEMOKINE
a chemical, secreted by certain immune system cells, that acts as a messenger between cells and stimulates the activity of cells. 

CHEMOTHERAPY
the use of drugs to treat disease. 

CHIROPRACTIC
a system of treatment based on manipulation of the spine. 

CHOLAGOGUE
an agent (especially an herb) that improves bile flow.

CHOLANGITIS
inflammation of the bile duct, often characterized by jaundice. 

CHOLESTASIS
obstruction of the flow of bile between the liver, the gall bladder, and the small intestine.

CHOLESTEROL
a fatty substance in animal tissue that is an essential component of cell membranes, certain hormones, and nerve fiber insulation. Cholesterol is manufactured by the liver, and is also present in certain foods. There are two primary types of cholesterol in the blood, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), which is considered a risk factor for heart disease; and high-density lipoprotein (HDL), which is considered protective. 

CHOOSE MYPLATE
a visual diagram showing which foods are part of the daily recommended amounts included in a balanced diet. A healthy diet includes 6 to 11 servings of breads and grains 3 to 5 servings of vegetables; 2 to 4 servings of fruit; 2 to 3 servings of meat, fish, beans, or nuts; 2 to 3 servings of dairy products; and limited fats and oils. 

CHRONIC
a long-term or persistent disease. Contrast with acute.

CHRONIC ACTIVE HEPATITIS
a condition in which HCV or HBV continues to replicate and infect new cells after six months. 

CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME (CHRONIC FATIGUE IMMUNE DYSFUNCTION SYNDROME, CFIDS) an illness characterized by prolonged fatigue, neurological problems, joint and muscle pain, and/or impairment of the ability to function normally for six months or longer. 

CHRONIC HBV
a term for lifelong infection of hepatitis B. 

CHRONIC HEPATITIS
liver inflammation lasting longer than six months. 

CIRRHOSIS
a type of liver damage in which normal liver cells are replaced with fibrous scar tissue. In compensated cirrhosis, the liver is damaged but can still function. In decompensated cirrhosis, liver function is severely impaired and scar tissue interferes with normal blood flow through the liver, potentially leading to bleeding varices, ascites, "brain fog," and other symptoms. 

CLEARANCE
removal or elimination, e.g., of a virus or drug from the body. 

CLINICAL
relating to the treatment of patients. A clinical observation is based on a person's observed condition and symptoms, as distinguished from laboratory findings. 

CLINICAL TRIAL (CLINICAL STUDY) an organized procedure for determining the effectiveness of a new drug or therapy by administering the agent to volunteers under controlled conditions. In many clinical trials, new treatments are compared against older standard treatments or an inactive substance (placebo). 

CLOT
a sticky mass of coagulated blood cells and platelets. 

CLOTTING FACTOR (COAGULATION FACTOR) a protein (e.g., fibrinogen, prothrombin, Factor VIII) that is necessary for normal blood clotting. Several clotting factors are synthesized by the liver and production may be impaired when the liver is damaged. People with clotting factor deficiencies may experience prolonged bleeding and easy bruising. 

COBALAMIN
see vitamin B12. 

COEMZYME Q10
an antioxidant agent that is necessary for the proper activity of certain enzymes. 

COFACTOR
a factor that influences the progression of a disease or the action of a disease-causing agent. 

COFORMULATION
a combination of two or more medications combined into one medication. Examples include sofosbuvir/ledipasvir (Gilead) and ABT-450/ritonavir/dasabuvir (Abbvie). 

COGNITIVE DYSFUNCTION
reduction in mental functioning and ability to carry out tasks that require thinking, planning, and memory. 

COHORT
a group of individuals in a study who share a demographic, clinical, or other characteristic. 

COINFECTION
concurrent infection with more than one disease-causing organism (e.g., HCV and HIV). 

COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR (CSF) a cytokine responsible for regulating the production of white blood cells. Types include granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). 

COLOSTRUM
breast fluid produced during the first few days after a baby's birth (prior to milk production) that contains proteins, immunoglobulins, and immune cells. 

COMA
a state of deep unconsciousness; a vegetative state. 

COMBINATION THERAPY
use of two or more drugs together to improve the effectiveness of treatment. In HCV treatment, the term most often refers to the use of two or more HCV inhibitors with and without ribavirin. Contrast with monotherapy. Contrast with monotherapy.

COMPASSIONATE USE
an FDA classification that allows individuals to use experimental drugs prior to their approval for a serious illness for which there is no other suitable treatment. 

COMPENSATED CIRRHOSIS
see cirrhosis. 

COMPLEMENTARY THERAPY
an alternative therapy that is used in conjunction with a standard Western treatment. 

COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT (CBC) an inventory of the cellular components of the blood, including red blood cell count, hematocrit and hemoglobin, white blood cell count, and platelet count. 

COMPLETE EARLY VIROLOGICAL RESPONSE (cEVR) HCV RNA negative at treatment week 12.

COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY SCAN
(CT SCAN) a method of viewing the soft tissues of the body using X-rays. 

CONDOM
a sheath made of latex, polyurethane, or animal membrane that is worn over the penis to hold ejaculated semen. Condoms are used to prevent pregnancy; latex and polyurethane condoms also protect against HIV, HCV and certain other sexually transmitted diseases. The "female condom" (Reality) is an internal pouch worn inside the vagina or anus. 

CONFIDENCE INTERVAL
a statistical measure of the likelihood that an experimental result is "true" and not the result of chance alone. 

CONGENITAL
present from birth. 

CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
heart dysfunction that leads to a build-up of fluids in the body. 

CONJUNCTIVITIS
inflammation of the conjunctiva, a membrane that covers the eye and lines the eyelid.

CONSENSUS INTERFERON
a preparation that contains a variety of different types of interferon. 

CONTRACEPTION
birth control; a device or method that prevents conception (fertilization), implantation, or successful gestation.

CONTRAINDICATION
any circumstance or condition that makes a drug or other method of treatment inadvisable in a particular case. 

CONTROL ARM
a comparison group in a clinical trial that is used to verify an experimental result. A control group is typically given an older standard treatment or a placebo rather than the new experimental treatment under study. 

CONTROLLED TRIAL
a clinical trial in which a group receiving an experimental treatment is compared to a control group that is given a standard treatment or a placebo. 

COPEGUS
Genentech/Roche’s brand of ribavirin. see RIBAVIRIN.

CORE
the inner part of a virus that contains its genetic material. 

CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
damage to or blockage of the arteries that provide blood to the heart muscle. 

CORTICOSTEROID
a steroid hormone (e.g., prednisone, cortisone) produced by the cortex of the adrenal gland or manufactured synthetically. Corticosteroids have anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties, and are used to treat a variety of conditions. 

CREATININE
a metabolic byproduct produced by muscles; high levels in the blood may indicate kidney dysfunction.

CREST SYNDROME
a type of scleroderma characterized by a variety of different symptoms (primarily calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia). 

CRYOGLOBULIN
an abnormal immune protein.

CRYOGLOBULINEMIA
a condition in which cryoglobulins form in the blood. When the blood is cooled, the cryoglobulins clump together, causing the blood to thicken and restricting blood flow. Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia occurs in many people with HCV, although most do not experience symptoms. 

CRYOSURGERY
removal of damaged or cancerous tissue by freezing. 

CT SCAN
see computed tomography scan. 

CULTURE
a method of growing a microorganism in a laboratory. 

CUNNILINGUS
oral sex on a woman; contact between the mouth and the vulva or vagina. 

CUTANEOUS
relating to the skin. 

CYSTEINE
an amino acid; one of the building blocks of glutathione. 

CYTOKINE
a chemical messenger (e.g., interferon, interleukin, tumor necrosis factor) produced by white blood cells. Cytokines coordinate several aspects of the immune response, including stimulating antibody production and activating killer T-cells. 

CYTOPENIA
low levels of blood cells.

CYTOPLASM
the material that makes up the interior of a cell. 

CYTOPROTECTIVE
an agent that protects cells from damage. 

CYTOTOXIC T-LYMPHOCYTE (CTL, KILLER T-CELL) a type of CD8 white blood cell that targets and kills cells infected with viruses, bacteria, parasites, and other microorganisms. 

DAA’s
see direct-acting antivirals.

DACLATASVIR
(formerly BMS-790052) is an experimental drug candidate for the treatment of hepatitis C. It is being developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb. Daclatasvir's mechanism of action involves inhibition of the HCV structural protein NS5A. Recent research suggests that it targets two steps of the viral replication process, enabling rapid decline of HCV RNA.

DASABUVIR
(formerly ABT-333) is an HCV polymerase inhibitor.  It is part of the combination of brand name VIEKIRA PAK used to treat hepatitis C.

DATA (singular DATUM) factual information, especially results of an experiment or clinical trial. 

DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING BOARD (DSMB) an independent group of community representatives and clinical trial experts that evaluates clinical trials for safety and ethics. DSMBs typically examine interim data as a trial progresses and determine whether it should be stopped or allowed to continue based on safety issues and risk-benefit analysis.

DIDANOSINE (ddi, DDI) an HIV medication (brand name VIDEX and VIDEX EC). It is a reverse transcriptase inhibitor, used in combination with other antiretroviral drug therapy as part of active antiretroviral therapy (ART).  Ribavirin should be avoided if DDI is being used to treat HIV due to the risk of developing lactic acidosis.  

DECOMPENSATED CIRRHOSIS
see cirrhosis. 

DECOMPENSATION
a failure of the liver to compensate for damage or injury; decrease or breakdown of liver function.

DEHYDRATION
loss or lack of water in the body. Dehydration may result from prolonged vomiting or diarrhea, and may disrupt many bodily processes. 

DELIRIUM
a state of mental confusion, typically acute and rapid in onset that may be caused by factors including disease, drug use, or high fever. 

DELTA HEPATITIS
see hepatitis D. 

DEMENTIA
chronic loss of mental capacity. Dementia may involve progressive deterioration of thinking, memory, and motor function, and may also be associated with personality changes and psychological symptoms such as depression. 

DEMOGRAPHICS
the characteristics of a population (e.g., sex, race, age). 

DENTAL DAM
a flat square of latex or plastic, traditionally used for dental surgery, that can be used to protect against the spread of sexually transmitted diseases during oral sex. 

DEOXYRIBONUCLEIC ACID (DNA) a double-stranded nucleic acid that encodes genetic information. DNA is made up of four chemical building blocks (nucleotides) adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine. 

DEPRESSION (DYSTHYMIA) a mood disorder characterized by prolonged sadness or grief. 

DETOXIFICATION
removal of toxic (poisonous) substances. Detoxification of the blood is an important function of the liver. 

DIABETES MELLITUS (DM) a disease caused by insufficient insulin production or lack of responsiveness to insulin. Type 1 (insulin-dependent or juvenile-onset) diabetes results from an inability of the body to produce insulin. Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent or adult-onset) diabetes occurs later is life and is associated with decreased insulin production or insulin resistance.

DIAGNOSIS
the determination of the existence of a disease or condition. Diagnosis generally involves an evaluation of a person's medical history, clinical symptoms, and laboratory test results. 

DIALYSIS
a method for filtering waste from the blood that replaces the function of the kidneys that are not working properly.

DIARRHEA
frequent, loose bowel movements. Diarrhea may be caused by a variety of factors, including microorganisms and as a side effect of certain drugs. Persistent diarrhea can lead to dehydration and inadequate nutrient absorption. 

DIETITIAN
a medical professional specializing in dietetics, the study of nutrition and the use of special diets to prevent and treat disease. 

DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
the organs (mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and anus) associated with ingestion and digestion of food. 

DIRECT-ACTING ANTIVIRALS (DAA’s) there are at least 4 categories of direct antivirals—protease inhibitors, polymerase inhibitors (nucleoside and non-nucleoside inhibitors) and NS5a inhibitors. DAA’s target and inhibit viral enzymes that are important for replication of hepatitis C. Also called HCV inhibitors

DISCORDANT
not having the same serostatus, for example a couple in which one partner is HCV positive and the other is HCV negative. 

DIURETIC
an agent that increases loss of water from the body through urination. 

DM
see diabetes mellitus.

DNA
see deoxyribonucleic acid. 

DOSAGE
the amount of a drug that is given at one time. 

DOSE-RANGING TRIAL
a clinical trial in which different doses of a drug are compared to determine which dosage has the best balance of effectiveness and acceptable side effects. 

DOSHA
one of the three bodily humors (vata, pitta, and kapha,) recognized in Ayurvedic medicine. 

DOUBLE-BLIND
see blinding. 

DRUG-DRUG INTERACTION (DDI) a reaction that can occur when multiple drugs are taken together or drugs are taken with certain herbs or foods. Drug interactions may enhance or reduce the action of a drug and may increase its side effects, and could potentially cause life-threatening reactions. 

DRUG RESISTANCE
the loss of drug effectiveness of a drug that had previously been able to control or kill an organism such as a virus.

DX
abbreviation for diagnosis.

DYSFUNCTION
lack or loss of normal function. 

DYSPLASIA (adjective DYSPLASTIC) abnormal cell or tissue growth. 

DYSTHYMIA
see depression. 

EARLY VIROLOGICAL RESPONSE 
(EVR) 2 log10 drop in HCV RNA at treatment week 12. 

ECZEMA
a type of skin rash.

EDEMA
swelling caused by accumulation of fluid in body tissues. 

EFFICACY
effectiveness; the ability to achieve a desired result. 

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
the criteria of a clinical trial that includes inclusion and exclusion criteria. 

ELISA/ELISA II
see enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. 

EMBOLISM
a blood clot that travels through the bloodstream and becomes lodged in a blood vessel, causing a blockage.

EMPIRICAL
information based on data, not on a theory. 

ENCEPHALOPATHY
disease of the brain. See also hepatic encephalopathy. 

END-OF-TREATMENT RESPONSE 
(EOT or ETR) undetectable HCV RNA at the completion of treatment. 

ENDOCRINE
endocrine glands are ductless glands that regulate bodily functions via hormones secreted into the bloodstream. The endocrine system includes the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, thyroid, adrenal glands, and gonads (ovaries and testes). 

ENDOSCOPY
a method of examining the interior of a body cavity or hollow organ (e.g., esophagus, stomach) using an endoscope, a narrow, flexible fiber optic instrument that conducts light. 

ENDOTHELIUM 
(adjective ENDOTHELIAL) a layer of cells that lines blood and lymph vessels, the heart, and various body cavities. 

ENDPOINT
a marker of disease progression or treatment outcome. Endpoints may be clinical manifestations (e.g., disease symptoms, death) or laboratory results such as ALT level or viral load (sometimes called surrogate markers).  An endpoint of a clinical trial is the outcome—such as safety and effectiveness of the study medications.  

END-STAGE RENAL DISEASE 
(ESRD) kidney failure. 

ENROLLMENT CRITERIA
factors used to determine whether a person is eligible to participate in a clinical trial. See also inclusion criteria, exclusion criteria. 

ENTECAVIR 
(Brand name BARACLUDE) A nucleoside analogue produced by Bristol-Myers Squibb that is used to treat chronic hepatitis B. It is recommended as a first line of treatment except in people who have developed lamivudine resistance. 

ENTERIC
having to do with the intestines. 

ENTERIC HEPATITIS
see hepatitis E. 

ENVELOPE
the outer coat of a virus.

ENZYME
a protein that induces or accelerates a chemical reaction. 

ENZYME-LINKED IMMUNOSORBENT ASSAY 
(ELISA, ELISA II) a laboratory test used to detect the presence of antibodies in the blood. 

EOT
see end-of-treatment response. 

EPIDEMIOLOGY
the study of the frequency, distribution, and behavior of a disease within a population. 

EPIVIR
see lamivudine. 

EPO
see erythropoietin. 

EPOGEN
see erythropoietin. 

ERADICATION 
(verb ERADICATE) the complete elimination of an organism from the body. 

ERYTHROCYTE
a mature red blood cell. Erythrocytes transport oxygen to the tissues of the body. 

ERYTHROPOIETIN 
(EPOIETIN, EPO) a hormone produced by the kidneys that stimulates the production of red blood cells. Genetically engineered EPO (brand names Procrit, Epogen) is used to treat certain types of anemia. 

ESOPHAGUS 
(adjective ESOPHAGEAL) the swallowing tube; the portion of the digestive tract between the mouth and the stomach. 

ESRD
see end-stage renal disease. 

ESSENTIAL MIXED CRYOGLOBULINEMIA
see cryoglobulinemia. 

ESTROGEN
the primary female sex hormone or a synthetic analog. Estrogens stimulate the development of female secondary sex characteristics and regulate the reproductive cycle in women. 

ETIOLOGY
the cause of a disease. 

EVR
see early virological response. 

EXACERBATE
to worsen or make more severe. 

EXPANDED ACCESS
the distribution of an investigational medication to those who are in highest need and who may not qualify for the drug in clinical trials.  

EXCLUSION CRITERIA
conditions that disqualify someone from participating in a clinical trial. Contrast with inclusion criteria. 

EXPERIMENTAL ARM
the group of participants in a clinical trial that receives the new experimental treatment under study. 

EXPERIMENTAL DRUG
a new drug that is being tested as a treatment for a specific condition and has not yet been approved by the FDA for use. 

EXTRAHEPATIC
outside the liver.

FACTOR VIII
a protein synthesized by the liver that is necessary for proper blood clotting. 

FAILURE TO THRIVE
a condition in which an infant loses or fails to gain weight and develops at a slower rate than expected. 

FALSE-NEGATIVE
a negative test result in a person who has the disease or condition being tested. Contrast with false-positive.

FALSE-POSITIVE
a positive test result in a person who does not have the disease or condition being tested. Contrast with false-negative. 

FASCICULATION
an involuntary muscle contraction. 

FAST TRACK
a designation by the Food and Drug Administration to help facilitate the development and to expedite the review process for an experimental drug that has the potential to address an unmet medical need for a serious or life-threatening condition.

FATIGUE
unusual, prolonged, or excessive tiredness. 

FAT-SOLUBLE
capable of being dissolved in fat. Contrast water-soluble. 

FATTY ACID
an organic molecule made up of a hydrocarbon chain and a carboxylic acid group. Fatty acids may be saturated, monounsaturated, or polyunsaturated. 

FDA
see Food and Drug Administration. 

FEBRILE
having a fever or increased body temperature. 

FECAL-ORAL ROUTE
a route of transmission of infectious organisms which involves the transfer of fecal matter to the mouth—for example, by ingesting contaminated food or water, oral/anal sex. 

FECES (adjective FECAL) excrement; excreted waste matter. 

FELLATIO
oral sex on a man; contact between the mouth and the penis. 

FEMALE CONDOM
see condom.

FIBROMYALGIA 
(FIBROMYOSITIS) a condition characterized by pain throughout the body, often accompanied by fatigue. 

FRIBROMYOSITIS
see fibromyalgia. 

FIBROSIS 
(adjective FIBROTIC) liver damage in which fibrous tissue develops and replaces normal cells. 

FIBRINOGEN
a factor produced by the liver that is necessary for proper blood clotting. 

FIBROSCAN
 also called transient elastography is a technique that is used to assess the stiffness of the liver, i.e., the degree of the liver damage or scarring.

FILGRASTIM
see granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. 

FINE-NEEDLE ASPIRATION BIOPSY
a type of liver biopsy in which a tissue sample is withdrawn using a very fine needle.

FLARE 
(FLARE-UP) a sudden, acute worsening of disease symptoms. 

FLATULENCE
excessive intestinal gas.

FLAVIVIRUS
a group of viruses, several of which cause diseases in humans. HCV is related to flaviviruses, and some taxonomists consider the Hepacivirus genus to be part of the Flaviviridae family. 

FLUMADINE
see rimantadine.

FOLIC ACID 
(FOLATE) a vitamin necessary for red blood cell production and proper neurological function; folic acid also helps prevents neural tube defects in fetuses. 

FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
(FDA) the U.S. federal agency responsible for regulating the development, use, and safety of drugs, medical devices, cosmetics, and related products. The FDA approves new experimental drugs based on the results of clinical trials. 

FREE RADICAL
a molecule that contains an unpaired electron. Free radicals are a byproduct of normal metabolism. They are highly reactive and bind with other molecules. The "theft" of electrons by free radicals can disrupt normal cellular processes and cause cellular damage (oxidative stress). See also antioxidant.

FULMINANT
an unusually severe or aggressive form of a disease. 

FULMINANT HEPATITIS
a severe, life-threatening form of hepatitis. 

GALL BLADDER
an organ beneath the liver where bile is stored. 

GAMMA GLOBULIN
a preparation of antibodies injected to prevent or treat infection. Gamma globulin is used as post-exposure prevention for hepatitis A and hepatitis B. 

GAMMA-GLUTAMYL TRANSPEPTIDASE (GGT) a liver enzyme. Elevated GGT levels may indicate bile obstruction and liver damage. A normal GGT level is 30 to 60 IU/L. 

GAN CAO
see licorice root. 

GASTROENTERITIS
inflammation of the stomach and intestines. 

GASTROENTEROLOGY (also GASTROENTEROLOGIST) the medical specialty that deals with the digestive system; a gastroenterologist treats digestive diseases. 

GASTROINTESTINAL
having to do with the digestive system, especially the stomach and intestines. 

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
the digestive tube consisting of the mouth, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and anus. 

GB VIRUS C 
(GBV-C) see hepatitis G virus. 

G-CSF
see granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. 

GENE
(adjective GENETIC) the basic unit of heredity. Genes contain hereditary information encoded in the form of DNA (or RNA in some viruses). In animal and plant cells, genes are located on the chromosome in a cell's nucleus. 

GENE THERAPY
an approach to preventing or treating disease by replacing, removing, or introducing genes, or otherwise manipulating genetic material. 

GENERIC DRUG
a drug that is not protected by a patent and may be produced by any manufacturer. 

GENERIC NAME
a common name used to identify a drug, as opposed to a brand name used by a particular company for marketing (e.g., pegylated interferon is the generic name of the drug marketed under the brand names Peg-Intron and Pegasys).

GENETIC ENGINEERING
manipulation of an organism's genetic material to modify the proteins it produces. 

GENETIC MATERIAL
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA), the molecules that carry hereditary information. 

GENOME
the complete genetic code or "blueprint" of an organism. 

GENOTYPE
the genetic makeup of an organism. HCV has seven major genotypes (designated by the numbers 1 through 7). In the U.S. genotype 1a/b is most prevalent. See also quasispecies. 

GI
see gastrointestinal. 

GLOBULIN
see immunoglobulin. 

GLOMERULUS 
a small capillary bed in the kidney where blood filtration takes place.

GLOMERULONEPHRITIS
an inflammatory disorder of the glomeruli, often due to the build-up of cryoglobulins. 

GLUCONEOGENESIS
the conversion of glycogen to glucose in the liver. 

GLUCOSE 
(BLOOD SUGAR) a form of sugar that is the body's primary fuel. The liver stores glucose after meals and releases it again as needed. Abnormally low or high levels of glucose in the blood may indicate a metabolic disturbance (e.g., diabetes). 

GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE 
(G6PD) a human red blood cell enzyme. G6PD deficiency can cause severe anemia. 

GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITORS
Inhibitors of endoplasmic reticulum (ER), ?-glucosidase has been shown to inhibit viral replication and secretion. 

GLUTATHIONE
a natural antioxidant found in the body. 

GLYCINE
an amino acid; one of the building blocks of glutathione. 

GLYCOGEN
a carbohydrate stored in body tissues. The liver converts glucose from food into glycogen and stores it for later use. When needed, the liver converts glycogen back into glucose.

GLYCYRRHIZIN
see licorice root.

GM-CSF
see granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor.

GRAFT
a transplanted organ or tissue. 

GRANULOCYTE
a type of immune system white blood cell (e.g., neutrophil, basophil, eosinophil) that releases toxic chemicals to kill invading microorganisms and mediate allergic reactions. 

GRANULOCYTE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR 
(G-CSF) a cytokine that stimulates the production of granulocytes. Genetically engineered G-CSF (filgrastim; brand name Neupogen) is used to treat neutropenia. 

GRANULOCYTE MACROPHAGE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR 
(GM-CSF) a cytokine that stimulates growth of granulocytes and macrophages, two types of white blood cell. Genetically engineered GM-CSF (sargramostim; brand names Leukine, Prokine) is used to treat neutropenia. 

GRANULOCYTOPENIA
an abnormally low number of granulocytes in the circulating blood, which may lead to an increased risk of bacterial infection. In practice, the term is used to refer to neutropenia. 

HALF-LIFE
the time required for half of the original amount of a drug to be eliminated from the body, or for a drug to decrease to half its original concentration in the blood. 

HAS
see hepatic arterial stenosis.

HAT
see hepatic arterial thrombosis.

HBcAb
Hepatitis B core antibody is produced by the body and indicates that someone has been or is currently infected with hepatitis B. 

HBeAb
Hepatitis B “e” antibody is produced by the body and it is an indication that HBV medications or the body is naturally fighting off the virus. Typically people who have the ‘e’ antibody have low HBV DNA (viral load) levels.

HBsAb
Hepatitis B surface antibody is an antibody produced by the body that indicates a person is protected from becoming infected with hepatitis B. 

HBeAg
Hepatitis “e” antigen is a protein of the virus and indicates that the virus is actively replicating in the liver and that a person’s blood and bodily fluids are highly infectious. 

HBeAg SEROCONVERSION
A marker used to indicate successful treatment of chronic HBV with the loss of HBeAg (“e” antigen) and the development of the HBeAb (“e” antibody). 

HBIG
Hepatitis B immune globulin provides short-term protection for people exposed to hepatitis B. It is also given to infants born to HBV-infected mothers along with the infant vaccine to reduce the risk of chronic infection. 

HBsAg
Hepatitis B surface antigen is a protein of the virus that is the first to appear after infection. Continued presence of HBsAg for 6 months indicates chronic infection. 

HBV DNA
Hepatitis B deoxyribonucleic acid is the type and name of the virus. HBV DNA or viral loads are measured in international units or copies.

HBV RESISTANCE
Development of HBV mutations during HBV drug treatment that allows HBV to replicate and evade the effects of the HBV medications. 

HCC
see hepatocellular carcinoma. 

HCT
see hematocrit. 

HCV RNA
the genetic material of the hepatitis C virus. A detectable level of HCV RNA on a viral load test indicates that HCV is actively replicating. 

HELICASE INHIBITOR
a drug that inhibits the action of a virus' helicase enzyme, thus preventing the viral genetic material from unwinding, and interfering with viral replication. 

HEMATOCRIT 
(HCT) the percentage of red blood cells in a given amount of whole blood; the hematocrit reflects the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood. A normal hematocrit is 40 to 54% for adult men and 37 to 47% for adult women. 

HEMATOLOGICAL
having to do with the blood. 

HEMATOPOIESIS
the production of blood cells in the bone marrow. Hematopoietic stem cells give rise to all types of red and white blood cells. 

HEME
the iron-based pigment in red blood cells, a component of hemoglobin that is released when red blood cells are broken down. 

HEMOCHROMATOSIS
iron overload disease; a disease in which iron is not properly metabolized and builds up in tissues throughout the body, especially in the liver. 

HEMODIALYSIS
is a process in which a machine filters toxins and waste products from the blood; it is used when the kidneys are no longer able to filter the blood.  

HEMOGLOBIN (Hgb) the red, iron-based pigment in red blood cells that enables them to transport oxygen. Also refers to a test of the amount of hemoglobin in red blood cells. 

HEMOLYSIS
the breakdown or destruction of red blood cells. 

HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
a low red blood cell count due to excessive cell destruction.

HEMOPHILIA
a hereditary disease in which a person does not produce sufficient blood clotting factors and is prone to prolonged bleeding. 

HEMORRHAGE
bleeding. 

HEPACIVIRUS
a genus of viruses that includes HCV. 

HEPATIC
having to do with the liver; also, an herbal remedy used to treat liver conditions. 

HEPATIC ARTERIAL STENOSIS 
(HAS) narrowing of the hepatic artery. 

HEPATIC ARTERIAL THROMBOSIS 
(HAT) the formation of clots in the hepatic artery. 

HEPATIC ARTERY
the blood vessel that delivers oxygen-rich blood to the liver. 

HEPATIC COMA
loss of consciousness due to advanced liver disease. When the liver is damaged, it cannot remove toxins from the body; these toxins build up in the bloodstream causing brain damage and other symptoms. Hepatic coma is an indication of advanced liver failure. 

HEPATIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
impaired brain function due to advanced liver damage; this occurs when the damaged liver can no longer effectively filter toxins from the bloodstream.

HEPATIC PANEL
see liver function tests. 

HEPATIC RESECTION
surgical removal of part of the liver; may be done to treat liver cancer.

HEPATIC VEIN
the blood vessel that carries filtered blood from the liver to the heart.

HEPATITIS
inflammation of the liver. Hepatitis may have various causes, including viruses, toxins, and heavy alcohol consumption. 

HEPATITIS A 
(INFECTIOUS HEPATITIS) a viral disease of the liver that is primarily transmitted by the fecal-oral route. Symptoms may include fever, fatigue, nausea, and jaundice. Hepatitis A typically resolves on its own and does not become chronic. There is no standard treatment for hepatitis A, but an effective vaccine is available. 

HEPATITIS A VIRUS 
(HAV) the virus that causes hepatitis A. 

HEPATITIS B 
(SERUM HEPATITIS) a viral disease of the liver. Hepatitis B is a blood-borne disease, but may also be transmitted sexually or vertically from mother to child. Symptoms may include fever, fatigue, abdominal pain, jaundice, and elevated liver enzymes. Hepatitis B becomes chronic in about 5 to 10% of infected adults. Standard treatments for hepatitis B are interferon and lamivudine; an effective vaccine is available. 

HEPATITIS B IMMUNOGLOBULIN 
(HBIG) a preparation of antibodies administered as postexposure prophylaxis to prevent illness in people exposed to the hepatitis B virus. 

HEPATITIS B VIRUS 
(HBV) the virus that causes hepatitis B. 

HEPATITIS C 
(formerly NON-A / NON-B HEPATITIS) a viral disease of the liver. Hepatitis C is a blood-borne disease; in rare cases it may be transmitted sexually or vertically from mother to child. Symptoms may include fever, fatigue, abdominal pain, jaundice, and elevated liver enzymes. Chronic hepatitis C can lead to long-term liver damage. Standard treatment for hepatitis C is a combination of interferon (standard or pegylated) plus ribavirin; there is currently no vaccine. 

HEPATITIS C VIRUS 
(HCV) the virus that causes hepatitis C. 

HEPATITIS D 
(DELTA HEPATITIS) a viral disease of the liver. Hepatitis D is caused by a blood-borne virus that only causes disease in people already infected with hepatitis B. 

HEPATITIS D VIRUS 
(HDV) the virus that causes hepatitis D. 

HEPATITIS E 
(ENTERIC HEPATITIS) a viral disease of the liver. Hepatitis E is spread through the fecal-oral route. The disease is rare in the U.S., but common in Africa and Asia. It is usually mild, but may be severe and possibly fatal in pregnant women. 

HEPATITIS E VIRUS 
(HEV) the virus that causes hepatitis E. 

HEPATITIS G VIRUS 
(HGV, GB VIRUS C, GBV-C) a blood-borne virus that appears to be related to hepatitis C. It is not known to cause disease. 

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA 
(HCC) a type of primary liver cancer seen in some people with long-term liver damage due to chronic hepatitis C or hepatitis B.

HEPATOCELLULAR NECROSIS
 concerning localized liver cell tissue death.

HEPATOCYTE
a liver cell. 

HEPATOLOGY 
the medical specialty that deals with the liver; a hepatologist treats liver disease. 

HEPATOMEGALY
enlargement of the liver. 

HEPATORENAL SYNDROME
pertaining to the kidney failure in the presence of liver disease.

HEPATOTOXICITY 
(adjective HEPATOTOXIC) toxic or poisonous to the liver. 

HERBALISM 
(HERBAL THERAPY) the medicinal or therapeutic use of plants or plant products. 

HERPES
a common viral infection that can cause fever blisters, genital sores, and shingles. 

HGB
see hemoglobin. 

HISTAMINE
a cellular compound that is released in response to an allergen and causes the symptoms of allergic reactions.

HISTOLOGY 
the study or examination of body tissues. In people with HCV, histological improvement refers to improved liver tissue health, including decreased inflammation and reduced fibrosis or cirrhosis. 

HISTOLOGICAL RESPONSE
an improvement in liver tissue condition (e.g., reduced inflammation) in response to treatment.

HIV
see human immunodeficiency virus. 

HIV DISEASE
infection with the human immunodeficiency virus, which attacks the body's immune system. AIDS is the late, symptomatic stage of HIV disease. 

HODGKIN’S DISEASE
tumor or cancer of the lymphatic system.

HOMEOPATHY
an alternative healing system based on the theory that "like cures like." Homeopathic therapy uses extremely diluted doses of substances that normally cause the types of symptoms being treated. 

HOMEOSTASIS
the state of equilibrium of the body to maintain a stable internal environment.

HORMONE
a chemical messenger (e.g., adrenaline, testosterone) involved in the regulation and coordination of bodily or cellular functions. Hormones may act locally or be secreted into the bloodstream. 

HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY 
(HRT) the administration of hormones to replace those that the body is unable to produce; typically refers to estrogen replacement therapy in postmenopausal women. 

HOST CELL
a cell infected with a virus or other microorganism.

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS 
(HIV) a slow-acting retrovirus associated with AIDS. HIV is transmitted through blood-to-blood contact, sexual activity, or from mother to child. 

HUMAN LEUKOCYTE ANTIGEN 
(HLA) a genetic marker of "self" which prevents the immune system from attacking the body's own tissues. 

HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
an excess level of bilirubin in the blood, characterized by jaundice, pale-colored stools, and dark urine. 

HYPERCHOLESTEREMIA
a high level of cholesterol in the blood.

HYPERGLOBULINEMIA
an abnormally high level of immunoglobulins (antibodies) in the blood. 

HYPERGLYCEMIA
high blood sugar. 

HYPERTENSION
high blood pressure. 

HYPERTHYROIDISM
increased thyroid gland activity and thyroid hormone overproduction 

HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY (HCM) a disease of the heart where enlargement and thickening develops in one part of the heart.

HYPOALBUMINEMIA
a low level of the blood protein albumin. 

HYPOTHESIS
an assumption or theory used to guide a scientific investigation. 

HYPOTHYROIDISM
decreased thyroid gland activity and reduced thyroid hormone production. 

IBUPROFEN
a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug used to relieve pain and reduce fever. Advil, Aleve, and Motrin are common brand names. 

ICTERUS
see jaundice.

IDIOPATHIC
a term used to describe a disease or condition of unknown cause or origin. 

IDU
see injection drug user. 

IFN
see interferon. 

IG
immunoglobulin; see antibody. 

IL28B
see interleukin 28B

IMMUNE CLEARANCE
A phase of chronic HBV that is marked by increased levels of ALT and HBV DNA (viral load). During this phase there is more damage occurring in the liver.

IMMUNE GLOBULIN
see antibody. 

IMMUNE RESPONSE
the activity of the immune system, for example against an outside invader (e.g., bacteria, virus), cancerous cells, or the body's own tissues (autoimmune response). 

IMMUNE SYSTEM
the body's defense system that protects against foreign invaders (e.g., bacteria, viruses). Some immune defenses are nonspecific (e.g., phagocytosis), while others are directed against specific invaders (e.g., antibody production). Organs of the immune system include the lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, and tonsils. 

IMMUNE TOLERANT
A phase of chronic HBV when HBV DNA levels are high, but ALT levels are low. This indicates that there is little liver damage occurring.

IMMUNITY
resistance to disease; the body's ability to recognize and defend against outside invaders and cancerous cells. Immunity may be either natural or acquired (for example, artificially induced through a vaccine). 

IMMUNIZATION
the process by which a person is protected against illness caused by a pathogen (e.g., bacteria, virus). Active immunization (vaccination) involves exposing a person to antigens to prompt the body to mount an immune response (e.g., production of antibodies). Passive immunization involves the injection of an antibody preparation (e.g., gamma globulin). 

IMMUNOCOMPETENT
capable of mounting an immune response. 

IMMUNOCOMPROMISE
see immunodeficiency. 

IMMUNODEFICIENCY
inability of the immune system to work properly, resulting in increased susceptibility to disease. 

IMMUNOGLOBULIN
see antibody. 

IMMUNOMODULATOR
an agent that influences the body's immune response. 

IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
see immunodeficiency. 

IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE
a drug or other agent that decreases immune system function. 

IMMUNOTHERAPY 
(IMMUNE-BASED THERAPY) a therapy that attempts to modify or enhance the immune response or reconstitute a damaged immune system. 

IMPDH INHIBITOR
see inosine monophosphate dehyrogenase inhibitor. 

INACTIVE CARRIER
A phase of chronic HBV that is marked by low HBV DNA, and ALT levels indicating less damage occurring in the liver.

INCIVEK 
(generic name telaprevir) an HCV protease inhibitor (taken in combination with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin) previously used to treat hepatitis C.

INCIDENCE 
(also INCIDENCE RATE) the number of new cases of a disease or condition in a specific population during a given period of time. The incidence rate is determined by dividing the number of new cases by the total population. Contrast with prevalence. 

INCLUSION CRITERIA
conditions that a person must meet in order to be eligible for a clinical trial. Contrast with exclusion criteria. 

INCUBATION PERIOD
the period of time between initial exposure to an infectious microorganism and the development of disease symptoms. 

IND
acronym for Investigational New Drug.

INDUCTION THERAPY
the initiation phase of a particular treatment. Typically induction therapy uses higher or more frequent doses of a drug. Contrast with maintenance therapy. 

INFECTION
a condition in which the body is invaded by an infectious organism (e.g., bacteria, virus, fungus). 

INFECTIOUS
a disease or condition that can be transmitted from one person to another. 

INFECTIOUS HEPATITIS
see hepatitis A. 

INFERGEN
brand name of interferon alfacon 1 consensus interferon. 

INFLAMMATION
the body's response to tissue injury or infection, typically characterized by redness, swelling, heat, and pain. 

INFORMED CONSENT
a mechanism designed to protect subjects in clinical trials. Before entering a trial, participants must sign a form stating that they have been given and understand important information about the trial (including possible risks and benefits) and voluntarily agree to take part. 

INFUSION
direct injection (e.g., of a drug, nutrients) into the bloodstream. 

INHIBITOR
an agent that inhibits or blocks an activity. 

INJECTION DRUG USER 
(IDU) a person who uses an illegal drug (e.g., heroin, cocaine) administered with a needle and syringe. The terms intravenous drug user (IVDU) and people who inject drugs (PWID) are also sometimes used. 

INOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE (IMPDH) INHIBITOR
an agent (e.g., ribavirin) that interferes with the synthesis and storage of guanine, thus inhibiting viral replication.

INSOMNIA
inability to sleep. 

INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD
(IRB) a multidisciplinary group that reviews and ensures the ethical conduct of clinical trials that include human participants. 

INSULIN
a peptide hormone produced in the pancreas that enables cells to use glucose. Lack of or insensitivity to insulin results in diabetes. 

INSULIN RESISTANCE
a condition in which the body's tissues cannot properly use insulin, leading to blood sugar imbalances. 

INTENT-TO-TREAT ANALYSIS
a method of analyzing the results of a clinical trial in which all participants who were originally assigned to an arm are analyzed, including those who dropped out due to treatment failure or side effects. Contrast with as-treated analysis. 

INTERFERON 
(IFN) a cytokine (messenger protein) that plays a role in immune response. The three major classes of interferon are alpha, beta, and gamma. 

INTERFERON-ALPHA
a naturally occurring protein produced by the immune system that interferes with viral replication. Interferon-alpha (brand names include Intron-A, Roferon-A).

INTERLEUKIN 
(IL) a cytokine (chemical messenger), secreted by immune system blood cells, that regulates a range of immune functions. 

INTERLEUKIN 28B 
(IL28B)  a variation of interleukin that directs an immune response to the hepatitis C virus.  IL28B is categorized into genotypes CC, TT, and C/T.  IL28B CC genotype produces that strongest immune response against hepatitis C.

INTERNATIONAL UNIT 
(IU) a standard unit of measurement. 

INTERNAL RIBOSOME ENTRY SITE INHIBITOR
an agent that interferes with the translation of viral genetic material and thus inhibits viral reproduction. 

INTOLERANCE
inability of the body to tolerate a drug, resulting in adverse side effects. 

INTRACELLULAR
within a cell. 

INTRAVENOUS 
(IV) injected directly into a vein. 

INTRAVENOUS IMMUNOGLOBULIN 
(IVIG) an antibody preparation administered intravenously to treat illness in a person whose own immune system does not produce sufficient antibodies. 

INTRON-A
brand name of interferon-alpha-2b. 

IN UTERO
in the uterus; refers to events that occur in the womb before birth. 

INVESTIGATIONAL NEW DRUG 
(IND) an FDA classification for experimental drugs that are undergoing clinical trials to assess their safety and effectiveness prior to marketing approval. 

INVESTIGATOR
a clinical researcher who is involved with a clinical trial protocol and its implementation. The Principal Investigator is ultimately responsible for the conduct of the trial. 

IN VITRO
Latin for "in glass"; refers to studies done in a test tube or culture medium in the laboratory. 

IN VIVO
Latin for "in a living organism"; refers to studies done using human or animal subjects. 

IRES INHIBITOR
see internal ribosome entry site inhibitor. 

IRON
an important trace element needed for the production of hemoglobin in red blood cells. High levels of iron can be toxic to the liver. 

IRON-DEFICIENCY ANEMIA
the most common type of anemia, caused by a lack of iron. 

ISCHEMIA
reduced blood supply to bodily tissues.

ISLET CELL
a cell in the Islets of Langerhans in the pancreas that produces insulin. 

IU
see international unit. 

IV
see intravenous.

IVDU
see injection drug user. 

IVIG
see intravenous immunoglobulin

JAUNDICE
(icterus, icteric) yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes due to high bilirubin levels in the blood. Jaundice is often a sign of liver damage or gallbladder disease. 

KAYSER-FLEISCHER RINGS
see Wilson’s disease.

KETONE
a byproduct of fat metabolism. When the body does not have enough glucose, the liver converts fatty acids into ketones, which are used as fuel by the muscles. 

KIDNEY (adjective RENAL) one of two bean-shaped organs located in the lower back part of the abdominal cavity. The kidneys filter waste material from the blood and excrete urine. 

KIDNEY STONE (NEPHROLITHIASIS) an accumulation of substances (e.g., drug crystals, minerals) in the kidneys, leading to blockage and pain. 

KUPFFER CELL
a type of macrophage that resides in the liver and ingests bacteria absorbed from the intestines.

LACTATION
production of breast milk.

LAMIVUDINE 
(Brand name EPIVIR-HBV) A nucleoside analogue medicine used to treat chronic hepatitis B and HIV. Lamivudine is not recommended as a first line of HBV treatment because of the high rate of drug resistance. 

LAPAROSCOPIC LIVER BIOPSY
a type of liver biopsy using a laparoscope.

LAPAROSCOPY
a procedure in which a lighted instrument is inserted through an abdominal incision for the purpose of diagnosis, biopsy, or surgery. 

LATENCY
(adjective LATENT) the state in which a disease-causing organism is present in the body, but not actively replicating or causing illness. 

LAXATIVE
an agent that promotes bowel evacuation (defecation).

LECITHIN
a fatty compound required for proper metabolism. 

LEDIPASVIR
an HCV NS5A inhibitor (used in combination with sofosbuvir as part of brand name HARVONI) used to treat hepatitis C. 

LESION
a tissue injury or wound. 

LEUKINE
see granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. 

LEUKOCYTE
an immune system white blood cell (e.g., T-cell, B-cell, neutrophil).

LICHEN PLANUS
an inflammatory disease of the skin and mucous membranes characterized by red or purple bumps or blotches. The cause of lichen planus is not known, but it appears to be an autoimmune condition.

LICORICE ROOT 
(GLYCYRRHIZA GLABRA, GLYCYRRHIZIN, GAN CAO) an herbal remedy traditionally used to treat diseases of the liver and bronchial conditions. Glycyrrhizin is an active component of licorice root. 

LIPID
a fat. 

LIPODYSTROPHY
a syndrome that involves abnormal lipid metabolism and redistribution of body fat.

LIPOGENESIS
production of lipids (fats). 

LIVER
organ on the upper right side of the abdomen that plays an important role in the metabolism of sugars and fats, synthesizes several proteins, and filters toxins from the blood. 

LIVER BIOPSY
a medical procedure that removes a piece of liver tissue which is then examined under a microscope for inflammation and damage.  

LIVER CANCER
malignant proliferation of cells in the liver. The most common type of liver cancer in people with chronic hepatitis is hepatocellular carcinoma.

LIVER CELL
see hepatocyte.

LIVER ENZYME
see aminotransferase. 

LIVER FUNCTION TESTS 
(HEPATIC PANEL) a group of blood tests that measure levels of liver enzymes, proteins, and various other substances. Liver function tests are used to help diagnose liver disease, assess the degree of liver damage and determine how well treatment is working. 

LIVING DONOR
a person who donates an organ or part of an organ while alive to another person.

LOBE
one of the four anatomical divisions of the liver; lobes are further divided into lobules. 

LOBULE OF LIVER
a structural unit consisting of hepatic (liver) cells shaped like a hexagon with six portal triads surrounding a central vein.

LOG
a measure based on the logarithmic scale that refers to quantities in factor of ten. A log change is an exponential, or 10-fold, increase or decrease (e.g., a change from 10 to 100 is a 1-log increase; a change from 1,000,000 to 10,000 is a 2-log decrease). Viral load is sometimes expressed in logs. 

LUPUS
see systemic lupus erythematosus. 

LYMPH NODE 
(LYMPH GLAND) a small, bean-sized organ located throughout the body, with concentrations in the neck, groin, and armpits. Lymph nodes filter out antigens and are the site of immune cell activation. 

LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
a network of organs and vessels that help maintain the fluid environment of the body and coordinate immune responses. The lymphoid organs include the lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, tonsils, and adenoids. 

LYMPHOCYTE
a type of white blood cell (e.g., T-cell, B-cell, natural killer cell) that plays a role in the body's immune defense. 

LYMPHOCYTOPENIA
a deficiency of lymphocytes. 

MACROPHAGE
a large scavenger white blood cell that ingests and processes foreign invaders and cellular debris. Specialized macrophages protect the skin, lungs (alveolar macrophages), brain (microglia), liver (Kupffer cells), and other tissues. 

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING 
(MRI) a sensitive, non-invasive method for viewing soft tissues of the body using a magnetic field. 

MAINTENANCE THERAPY
therapy that follows successful initial treatment of an illness; generally maintenance therapy continues for a long period of time (possibly for life) to prevent disease recurrence. Contrast with induction therapy. 

MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX 
(MHC) a group of genes that controls the expression of cell surface protein markers (also known as human leukocyte antigen, or HLA, markers) that allow immune cells to recognize the body's own cells (that is, to distinguish "self" from "non-self"). 

MALAISE
a generalized feeling of illness and discomfort; a flu-like feeling. 

MALIGNANCY
a cancer, neoplasm, or tumor that grows in an uncontrolled manner, and may invade nearby tissue and metastasize, or spread, to other areas of the body. 

MALIGNANT
a condition that is severe, harmful, or resistant to treatment. Contrast with benign. 

MALNUTRITION
lack of the minimum amount of nutrients (proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, minerals, etc.) necessary for good health. Malnutrition may result from poor diet, lack of appetite, or inadequate absorption of nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract. 

MAXIMINE
see histamine dihydrochloride. 

MEAN
(AVERAGE) a statistical measurement of the central tendency, or average, of a set of values. For example, in the series of values "1, 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 8, 10, 21," the mean is 7 (determined by adding up all the values and dividing by the number of values). Contrast with median. 

MEDIAN
the number within a series that is preceded and followed by an equal number of values. For example, in the series of values "1, 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 8, 10, 21," the median is 6 (there are four values lower and four values higher). Contrast with mean. 

MEDICAID
in the United States, a program that is funded by federal and state governments that pays for medical care for those who can’t afford it. 

MEDICARE
in the United States, a program that pays for certain health care expenses for people 65 and older. 

MEDITATION
a technique for relaxation and clearing and focusing the mind. 

MEGAKARYOCYTE
a large precursor blood cell that gives rise to platelets.

MELD
an acronym for Model End Stage Liver Disease. A severity score or calculation used for adults with liver disease to rank candidates for liver transplantation. 

MEMBRANE
a thin sheet or layer of tissue that serves as a semi-permeable covering. 

MEMBRANOPROFLIFERATIVE GLOMERULONEPHRITIS 
(MH) is a condition that affects the kidneys that is usually (but not always) associated with cryoglobulinemia. Symptoms include weakness, edema and arterial hypertension. (See also glomerulonephritis)

MEMBRANOUS NEPHROPATHY
a disease of the kidneys where HCV antibodies and viral particles are deposited in the kidneys.

MENOPAUSE
the cessation of menstruation. 

MENSTRUATION
a stage of the female reproductive cycle. An ovum (egg) matures and is released every month. Hormones prepare the uterus for possible implantation. If pregnancy does not occur, the uterine lining (blood and tissue) is shed and expelled (the menstrual period). 

MESSENGER RNA 
(mRNA) a piece of ribonucleic acid that carries genetic information from DNA to ribosomes in order to synthesize new proteins. 

METABOLISM 
(adjective METABOLIC) the processes of building the body's molecular structures from nutrients (anabolism) and breaking them down for energy (catabolism). Also, the chemical processing or breakdown of food, drugs, and toxins. 

METASTASIS 
(adjective METASTATIC, verb METASTASIZE) a disease (especially cancer) that spreads from one part of the body to another. 

METHADONE
an oral opiate-like drug used for pain management and to treat opiate (e.g., heroin) addiction. Methadone maintenance therapy prevents withdrawal symptoms by administering small doses of the drug on a regular basis. 

METHIONINE
see s-adenosylmethionine. 

MILK THISTLE 
(SILYBUM MARIANUM, SILYMARIN) the most widely used herbal remedy to treat chronic hepatitis. Silymarin is a combination of active components derived from milk thistle. Studies suggest that milk thistle can reduce hepatitis symptoms and helps prevent liver damage. 

MINERAL
an inorganic element that promotes chemical reactions within the body and is necessary for proper cellular metabolism. Essential minerals include calcium, iodine, iron, magnesium, potassium, and zinc. 

MISCARRIAGE
a pregnancy that ends prematurely and is not carried to term. 

MITOCHONDRION 
(plural MITOCHONDRIA) a rod-shaped organelle in the cytoplasm of a cell that produces energy. 

MHC
see major histocompatibility complex. 

MOLECULE
a small unit of matter made up of atoms. A molecule is the smallest unit of a substance that retains its unique characteristics. 

MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES
a preparation consisting of identical antibodies active against a specific pathogen. 

MONOCYTE
a large white blood cell that plays a role in immune defense. Monocytes circulate in the bloodstream; when they migrate to the tissues, they mature into macrophages. 

MONOGAMY (MONOGAMOUS) having a single spouse; more often used to refer to having a single sexual partner. 

MONOTHERAPY
use of a single drug for treatment. Monotherapy for HCV is no longer considered standard treatment. Contrast with combination therapy. 

MOOREN CORNEAL ULCERATION
a condition affecting the eyes causing pain, inflammation, tearing and loss of sight.

MORBIDITY
sickness; the state of being affected by disease. 

MORTALITY 
(also MORTALITY RATE) death. The mortality rate is the rate of death in a given population. 

MOXA
the herb mugwort. 

MOXIBUSTION
in traditional Chinese medicine, the burning of an herb (moxa) to generate heat and stimulate the flow of qi.

MRI
see magnetic resonance imaging. 

mRNA
see messenger RNA. 

MU
abbreviation for million units. 

MUCOUS MEMBRANE
MUCOSA) a moist layer of semi-permeable tissue lining the openings of the body (e.g., the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and genitourinary tracts). 

MULTIFOCAL
occurring at more than one site. 

MULTIPLE MYELOMA
a form of cancer of the bone marrow that causes anemia, infections, and bleeding.

MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS
a statistical analysis that takes into account several different factors or variables. 

MULTIVITAMIN
a nutritional supplement that contains several different essential vitamins and minerals. 

MUTATION (verb MUTATE) a change in the character of a gene that is perpetuated when a cell divides or a virus replicates. 

MYALGIA
muscle pain. 

MYELIN
a white fatty substance that forms a sheath around the axons of neurons (nerve cells) and provides the insulation necessary for the proper transmission of electrical impulses. 

MYELOSUPPRESSION
inhibition of the bone marrow, resulting in decreased blood cell production. 

MYELOTOXIC
poisonous to or destructive of the bone marrow.

MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
blockage of the arteries serving the heart, often leading to angina pectoris and/or heart attack. 

MYOPATHY
muscle inflammation, damage, or disease. 

NAC
see n-acetyl-cysteine. 

N-ACETYL-CYSTEINE
(NAC) a form of the animo acid cysteine that is available as a nutritional supplement. NAC is used to prevent liver damage due to acetaminophen overdose. 

NAIVE
inexperienced. Often used to describe an individual who has never taken a certain drug, or to an undifferentiated immune system cell. 

NARCOTIC
see opiate. 

NATURAL HISTORY STUDY
a study of the natural development of a disease over time.

NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
(NIH) a large biomedical research organization that is part of the U.S. Public Health Service. The NIH includes several institutes, centers, and divisions. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) conduct research on viral hepatitis. 

NATURAL KILLER (NK) CELL
a type of white blood cell that attacks and kills tumor cells and cells infected with microorganisms. 

NATUROPATHY
a system of natural healing based on the philosophy that the body has the ability to cure itself. 

NAUSEA
stomach distress characterized by an aversion to food and an urge to vomit. 

NDA
see new drug application. 

NECROSIS
cell or tissue death. 

NECROINFLAMMATION
tissue inflammation and death. 

NEONATE 
(adjective NEONATAL) a newborn, especially within the first days or weeks after birth. 

NEOPLASM 
(NEOPLASIA) a tumor or growth; tissue that develops abnormally or cells that proliferate more rapidly than normal. A benign neoplasm (e.g., a wart) is localized and does not spread to other tissues; a malignant neoplasm (cancer) can spread to other parts of the body. 

NEPHROLITHIASIS
see kidney stone. 

NEPHROTOXICITY
the property of being poisonous or harmful to the kidneys.

NEUPOGEN
see granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.

NEURALGIA
nerve pain. 

NEUROPATHY 
(adjective NEUROPATHIC) nerve damage or disease. 

NEUTROPENIA
an abnormally low number of neutrophils, resulting in increased susceptibility to infection. 

NEUTROPHIL
the most common type of immune system white blood cell. Neutrophils are phagocytes that engulf and destroy invading organisms such as bacteria and fungi. 

NEW DRUG APPLICATION 
(NDA) an application made by a drug manufacturer to the FDA to request marketing approval for a new drug. 

NIACIN
see vitamin B. 

NIAID
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. See National Institutes of Health.

NIDDK
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. See National Institutes of Health.

NIH
see National Institutes of Health. 

NK CELL
see natural killer cell. 

NON-A/NON-B HEPATITIS
see hepatitis C. 

NON-HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
(NHL) cancer of lymphoid tissues.

NONINVASIVE
a device or procedure that does not require puncturing the skin.

NON-NUCLEOSIDE REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITOR (NNRTI) an antiviral drug that suppresses viral replication by interfering with the action of the reverse transcriptase enzyme. 

NONOXYNOL-9
a chemical formerly used as a spermicide and microbicide. Studies have shown that nonoxynol-9 causes tissue damage and may increase the risk of STD transmission. 

NONRESPONDER
person who does not show improvement while undergoing treatment. In HCV, a nonresponder does not achieve normal ALT levels or an undetectable viral load. 

NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUG 
(NSAID) a drug (e.g., aspirin, acetaminophen, ibuprofen) that relieves pain and reduces inflammation by blocking the body's production of prostaglandins. 

NNRTI
see non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor. 

NS5A INHIBITOR
an agent that inhibits viral replication of the hepatitis C virus’ NS5a enzyme. 

NRTI
see nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor. 

NSAID
see nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. 

NUCLEOSIDE ANALOG
see nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor. 

NUCLEOSIDE REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITOR (NRTI, NUCLEOSIDE ANALOG) a drug that mimics a nucleoside, one of the building blocks of genetic material (DNA or RNA). NRTIs suppress viral replication by interfering with the action of the reverse transcriptase enzyme, causing premature termination of new chains of genetic material. Ribavirin is an NRTI.

NUCLEOTIDE
a genetic building block. 

NULL RESPONDER
a person who does not achieve a 2 log10 drop of HCV RNA by treatment week 12. 

NUTRIENT
an agent that promotes proper growth and metabolism. 

NUTRITION
the process by which living organisms digest and metabolize food to use for maintenance and growth of tissues.

OFF-LABEL
use of an FDA-approved drug for an indication other than that for which it was approved. 

OLYSIO
see simeprevir 

OMBITASVIR
(formerly ABT-267) is an HCV polymerase inhibitor (Ombitasvir is part of brand name VIEKIRA PAK) that is used to treat hepatitis C. 

ONCOGEN
an agent that promotes neoplastic cell growth, or cancer. 

ONCOGENESIS
the development and growth of cancer. 

ONCOLOGIST
a physician who specializes in the treatment of cancer.

ONCOLOGY
the study and treatment of cancer. 

OPEN-LABEL
a drug trial which is not randomized and not blinded; both participants and investigators know what drug is being tested and what dosages are being used. 

OPIATE 
(NARCOTIC) a class of drugs (e.g., heroin, codeine, methadone) that are derived from the opium poppy or produced synthetically and have opium-like effects. Opiate drugs relieve pain, dull the senses, and induce sleep. 

OPPORTUNISTIC ILLNESS 
(OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTION, OI) an illness or infection that does not normally occur in a person with a healthy immune system, but affects immunocompromised persons. 

ORAL
relating to the mouth; taken by mouth. 

ORGANIC FOOD
food that is grown naturally without the use of chemical fertilizers, pesticides, or other artificial intervention. 

ORPHAN DRUGS
an FDA category of drugs developed to treat conditions that rarely occur.  The FDA offers financial incentives to offset the predicted lower rate of return on the investment in clinical development. 

OSTEOARTHRITIS
degenerative joint disease. 

OTC
see over-the-counter. 

OVER-THE-COUNTER 
(OTC) drugs that are available without a prescription. 

OXIDATIVE STRESS
increased levels of free radicals in the body, potentially leading to cell damage and death. 


PALLIATIVE
offering symptomatic relief and comfort care (e.g., alleviation of pain) rather than a cure. 

PALLOR
paleness. 

PANCREAS
a digestive gland in the abdominal cavity that secretes digestive enzymes. 

PANCREATITIS
inflammation of the pancreas. 

PANCYTOPENIA
an abnormally low level of all types of blood cells, typically due to bone marrow damage. 

PARACENTESIS
a procedure to remove fluid that has accumulated in the abdominal cavity—a condition called ascites.

PARACETOMAL
see acetaminophen

PARENTERAL
nutrients given by injection into a vein, bypassing the gastrointestinal tract. 

PARITAPREVIR 
(ABT-450)  a protease inhibitor. It is boosted with low dose ritonavir (paritaprevir is part of brand name VIEKIRA PAK) and is used to treat hepatitis C. 

PATHOGEN 
(adjective PATHOGENIC) any disease-causing agent, especially a microorganism (bacteria, virus, fungus, parasite). 

PATHOGENESIS
the development and progression of a disease.

PATHOLOGY 
(adjective PATHOLOGIC) the study of disease, including the causes, development, and progression of disease, and how the body is affected. 

PCR
see polymerase chain reaction. 

PEAK LEVEL
the highest level of drug reached in the body after a dose is taken. Contrast with trough level. 

PEER REVIEW
a review of the scientific merit of a clinical trial by independent experts.  

PEGASYS
brand name of pegylated interferon-alpha-2a.

PEGINTERFERON
see pegylated interferon. 

PEG-INTRON
brand name of pegylated interferon-alpha-2b. 

PEGYLATED INTERFERON 
(PEGINTERFERON) a form of interferon that has a long half-life in the body and can be injected less often (typically once per week). Pegylated interferon (brand names Peg-Intron, Pegasys) appears superior to standard interferon as a treatment for HCV. 

PEGYLATION
a process in which polyethylene glycol (PEG) molecules are attached to proteins in order to extend their activity in the body. 

PEI
see percutaneous ethanol injection. 

PERCUTANEOUS
through the skin.

PERCUTANEOUS ETHANOL INJECTION
a treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma in which ethanol (alcohol) is injected into the tumor.

PERIHEPATITIS
inflammation of the lining of the liver. 

PERINATAL
the period around the time of birth. 

PERINATAL TRANSMISSION
see vertical transmission. 

PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY
damage to the peripheral nerves, usually involving the feet and hands. 

PERITONEUM
the thick membrane that lines the abdominal cavity and covers the visceral organs. 

PERITONITIS
inflammation of the peritoneum. 

PERNICIOUS ANEMIA
a type of anemia caused by the inability of the intestine to absorb vitamin B12, which is needed to produce red blood cells. 

PHAGOCYTE
a scavenger cell that engulfs and destroys invading pathogens (phagocytosis). 

PHARMACEUTICAL
having to do with the development and manufacture of drugs, or to a manufactured drug. 

PHARMACOKINETICS
the action of drugs in the body, including the processes of absorption, metabolism, distribution to tissues, and elimination. 

PHARMACOLOGY
the science of drugs, their sources, and how they work. 

PHASE I TRIAL
the first stage of human testing of a new treatment. Phase I trials evaluate drug pharmacokinetics, safety, and toxicity at different dose levels, typically in a small number of healthy volunteers or in those who have the condition or disease. 

PHASE II TRIAL
the second stage of the evaluation of a new treatment in humans. Phase II trials evaluate safety and preliminary efficacy in a larger number of participants than Phase I studies.

PHASE III TRIAL
the third stage of human testing of an experimental treatment. Phase III trials are designed to determine the safety and efficacy of a treatment, often by comparing it to an existing standard therapy or a placebo. 

PHASE IV TRIAL
post-marketing studies done after a new treatment is approved and offered for sale. These trials provide additional information about safety and efficacy in large numbers of patients under "real world" conditions. 

PHLEBOTOMY
withdrawal of blood from a vein. 

PHOTOSENSITIVITY
an increased sensitivity to light, which may lead to easy sunburning and other adverse effects. 

PHYLLANTHUS
tropical plant species that traditionally have been used to treat liver conditions. 

PIGMENT
a substance responsible for the color of bodily tissues. 

PLACEBO
an inert, inactive agent (e.g., pill, injection) that has no treatment value. 

PLACEBO ARM
the group of participants in a clinical trial that receives an inactive substance (placebo). 

PLACEBO-CONTROLLED TRIAL
a clinical trial in which a group receiving an inactive substance or mock therapy (placebo) is compared to a group receiving the experimental treatment. 

PLACEBO EFFECT
a change in symptoms or disease progression associated with the treatment process itself, rather than the actual therapeutic value of a treatment. 

PLACENTA
the organ that connects the fetus and the mother's uterus and enables the exchange of oxygen, nutrients, and waste products. 

PLASMA
the fluid, non-cellular portion of circulating blood. See also serum.

PLASMAPHERESIS
a procedure in which certain components are removed from the blood plasma. 

PLATELET
see thrombocyte. 

PLATELET COUNT
The number of platelets in the blood. People with advanced liver disease may have reduced platelet counts, resulting in easy bleeding. A normal platelet count is 130,000-400,000/mcl. 

PNEUMONITIS
lung inflammation. 

PO
taken by mouth.

POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION 
(PCR) a highly sensitive test that uses an amplification technique to detect small amounts of genetic material (DNA or RNA) in a blood or tissue sample. 

POLYMERASE INHIBITOR
an agent that inhibits viral replication by interfering with the polymerase enzyme. 

PORPHYRIA CUTANEA TARDA
a condition in which porphyrins build up in the body leading to symptoms including increased photosensitivity, skin damage, and discoloration. 

PORPHYRIN
a metabolic byproduct of hemoglobin production. 

PORTAL HYPERTENSION
high blood pressure in the portal vein that carries blood to the liver, caused by the development of fibrous scar tissue (cirrhosis) in the liver. 

PORTAL SYSTEM
a series of veins from the small and large intestines, stomach, and spleen that join into the portal vein and are carried into the liver.

PORTAL VEIN
the blood vessel that carries oxygen-poor blood from the intestines to the liver for filtering. 

POSTEXPOSURE PREVENTION 
(POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS, PEP) treatment given immediately following exposure to an infectious organism in an attempt to prevent the infection from taking hold in the body. 

POST-MARKETING STUDY
see Phase IV trial. 

POSTNATAL 
(POSTPARTUM) the period following birth. 

POTASSIUM
an element and electrolyte responsible for the body’s growth and maintenance.

POWER
a statistical term used to describe the ability of a clinical trial to detect a particular result. Generally the power of a study increases as more participants are included or as the trial continues for a longer period of time. 

PRANA
in Ayurveda, the body's vital energy.

PRECLINICAL RESEARCH
laboratory and animal studies on an experimental treatment prior to clinical trials in humans. 

PRENATAL
the period preceding birth, during which the fetus develops in the uterus. 

PREVALENCE 
(also PREVALENCE RATE) the number of individuals with a condition in a specific population. The prevalence rate is determined by dividing the number of people with the condition by the total population. Contrast with incidence. 

PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN
a physician who is responsible for the overall long term health maintenance of a patient.

PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR
the chief researcher conducting a clinical trial.

PRIOR PARTIAL-RESPONDER
a person who has a 2 log10 drop in HCV RNA by treatment week 12, but who does not become HCV RNA negative by end of treatment. (Example 2 log10 drop
1,000,000 to ? 10,000)

PROCRIT
see erythropoietin.

PRODRUG
a compound that is converted to an active drug within the body. 

PROGESTERONE
a female hormone with anti-estrogen effects. Progesterone prepares the uterus for the development of the fertilized ovum and maintains the uterus throughout pregnancy. 

PROGNOSIS 
(adjective PROGNOSTIC) a forecast of the probable course or outcome of a disease. 

PROGRESSION
development of a disease over time. 

PROKINE
see granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.

PROPHYLAXIS
a measure taken to prevent a disease or condition.

PROSPECTIVE STUDY
a clinical trial in which participants are selected and their progression is followed over time. Contrast with retrospective study. 

PROTEASE INHIBITOR
an agent that inhibits viral replication by interfering with the virus' protease enzyme. 

PROTEIN
a complex organic compound consisting of a sequence of amino acids folded in a specific configuration. Proteins are major components of living cells and are essential for bodily growth and repair.

PROTHROMBIN
a protein synthesized by the liver that is necessary for proper blood clotting.

PROTHROMBIN TIME 
(PT) a measure of blood clotting time. People with advanced liver disease may have a slower than normal PT. A normal PT is 10-12 seconds. 

PROTOCOL
a written plan for a clinical trial, which typically includes details such as the hypothesis to be tested, who can participate, length of the trial, how the treatment under study will be administered, endpoints, and potential risks and benefits. 

PRURITUS 
(adjective PRURITIC) itchiness. 

PSORIASIS
a skin condition characterized by scaling and red patches, due to the overproduction of skin cells.

PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS
a form of rheumatoid arthritis associated with psoriasis.

PSYCHOSIS
a serious mental illness.

PSYCHOSOCIAL
a term used to refer to factors that affect the psychological or social realm. Psychosocial factors (e.g., socioeconomic status, education, family situation) can have an important effect on disease risk and progression and are an essential aspect of a person's well-being. 

PSYCHOTHERAPY
treatment of mental problems with non-medical therapies, in particular counseling.

PSYCHOTROPIC
a drug that affects psychological or mental functioning or behavior. 

PULMONARY FIBROSIS
the development of fibrous tissue in the lungs. 

PT
patient.

PURPURA
see thrombocytopenic purpura. 

PURULENT
characterized by the accumulation of pus. 

PUS
a thick, greenish-yellow fluid composed of dead white blood cells, killed microorganisms, and other cellular debris. 

P-VALUE
a measure of probability that is reported with clinical trial results. The p-value indicates the likelihood the result obtained are due to chance alone. Traditionally, a p-value of less than .05 is considered statistically significant, or not likely due to chance alone. See also confidence interval. 

PYRROLIZIDINE ALKALOID
a hepatotoxic component found in plants of the Crotalaria, Senecio, and Heliotropium families. 

Q
medical abbreviation for every, often used to specify drug dosing schedules (e.g., q6h means every 6 hours). 

QI 
(CHI) the vital energy believed to be responsible for health and disease in traditional Chinese medicine. 

QIGONG
a form of traditional Chinese exercise that promotes the healthy flow of qi. 

QUALITY OF LIFE STUDY 
(QOL) a clinical trial that measures how a condition affects the daily life of a person with a chronic illness.  A clinical trial of an investigational medication may have a quality of life component to find out the effects of the study drug on QOL and if successful treatment improves QOL.

QUALITATIVE
relating to, or expressed in terms of, quality. A qualitative viral load test measures the presence of a virus. 

QUANTITATIVE
relating to, or expressed in terms of, quantity. A quantitative viral load test measures the amount of viral genetic material. 

QUASISPECIES
individual genetic variants of HCV. Within a single genotype there may be multiple quasispecies.

RA
see rheumatoid arthritis.

RADIATION THERAPY 
(RADIOTHERAPY) the use of radiation to treat disease (especially cancer). 

RADIOGRAPHY
the use of X-ray pictures, for example for diagnosis. 

RADIOLOGIST
a physician who uses x-rays or other imaging procedures for diagnosis and treatment.

RANDOMIZED TRIAL
a clinical trial arranged to produce a chance distribution of participants into different arms (e.g., experimental treatment, standard treatment, or placebo). Clinical trial participants are usually randomized by computer to prevent potential bias of investigators.  Randomization is done to minimize bias.  

RAPID VIROLOGICAL RESPONSE 
(RVR) HCV RNA negative at treatment week 4.

RAYNAUD'S PHENOMENON
temporary interruption of blood flow to the extremities (fingers, toes, tip of nose and ears), often associated with exposure to cold temperatures. 

RBC
red blood cell. See erythrocyte.

RBV
see ribavirin.

REACTIVATION
the return of a previously latent (inactive) infection to an active, pathogenic state. 

REACTIVE ARTHRITIS 
(REITER'S SYNDROME) an arthritic disorder, often linked to conjunctivitis, that appears to be associated with viral infections. 

REBETOL
Schering’s brand of ribavirin. see ribavirin. 

REBETRON
a bundled kit for HCV treatment that packages together Intron-A brand interferon and ribavirin. 

REBOUND
an increase in viral load following a previous decrease. 

RECEPTOR
a specific binding site on a cell's surface or in its interior. When chemical messengers or drugs bind to receptors, various cellular functions are activated or inhibited. Viruses must bind receptors in order to enter cells.

RECOMBINANT
produced by genetic engineering. 

RECONSTITUTION
mixing a substance (e.g., Peg-Intron brand pegylated interferon) with water to return it to a usable form. 

RECURRENT
returning or occurring repeatedly. 

RED BLOOD CELL
see erythrocyte. 

RECRUITMENT
the period of time assigned to identify and enroll in a clinical trial.  

REFLEXOLOGY
an alternative healing technique that involves putting pressure on various zones of the body. 

REFRACTORY
resistant to treatment. 

REGENERATION
regrowth.

REGIMEN
a specific treatment protocol, including what drugs are taken and at what dosages. 

REIKI
a healing technique in which energy is channeled through the hands of the healer. 

REITER'S SYNDROME
see reactive arthritis. 

RELAPSE
recurrence of disease symptoms following a period of improvement. In HCV, relapse can refer to an increase in viral load after it has been suppressed. 

RELAPSER
a person who becomes HCV RNA negative at end of treatment, but becomes HCV detectable within 24 weeks from the end of treatment (EOT). 

RENAL
kidney

REPLICATION
multiplication or reproduction, specifically used when referring to a virus. 

RESECTION
see hepatic resection. 

RESISTANCE
the mutation of a microorganism in such a way that it loses its sensitivity to a drug; a resistant organism can function and replicate despite the drug's presence. 

RESOLVE
when referring to a condition, to clear up or heal.

RESPONDER-RELAPSER
a person who initially responds well to a treatment, but then experiences a relapse. In chronic HCV infection, this refers to a person who initially has a positive response to treatment (e.g., normal ALT, undetectable HCV RNA), but does not sustain this response once treatment is stopped. 

RESPONSE-GUIDED TREATMENT
Response-guided therapy uses HCV RNA testing during treatment to predict response and guide treatment duration for patients with chronic hepatitis C. 

RESPONSE TO TREATMENT
see treatment response. 

RETINOPATHY
disease of the retina of the eye. 

RETROSPECTIVE STUDY
a study based on medical records, looking backward in time at events that happened in the past. Contrast with prospective study. 

RETROVIRUS
a class of viruses that have their genetic material in the form of RNA and use the reverse transcriptase enzyme to transcribe their RNA into DNA within the host cell. 

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 
(RA) an autoimmune condition characterized by joint inflammation and destruction of connective tissue; other organs, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, and skin, may also be affected. 

RHEUMATOID FACTOR
a type of antibody (IgM) that reacts to abnormal IgG antibodies produced by people with autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. 

RHEUMATOLOGY
the study and treatment of conditions of the joints, muscles, bones, and connective tissues. 

RIBA
a type of antibody test; RIBA is often used to confirm HCV antibody positivity detected on an ELISA II test. 

RIBASPHERE
Kadmon Pharmaceutical’s brand of generic ribavirin; see ribavirin.

RIBAVIRIN 
(RBV)—brand name REBETOL, COPEGUS, RIBASPHERE, MODERIBA, an antiviral medication approved for use in combination with interferon to treat chronic HCV infection. 

RIBONUCLEIC ACID 
(RNA) a single-stranded nucleic acid that encodes genetic information. The presence of viral RNA in the blood indicates that a virus is actively replicating. Hepatitis C and HIV are examples of RNA viruses. RNA is made up of sequences of four building blocks adenine, cytosine, guanine, and uracil. The presence of viral RNA in the blood indicates that a virus is actively replicating. 

RIBOSOME
small organelles in the cell where new proteins are built from the RNA "blueprint." 

RIBOZYME
an RNA molecule that cleaves (cuts) RNA strands at a specific site. A ribozyme directed against a specific region of the HCV genome is currently under study as a treatment for HCV. 

RISK/BENEFIT RATIO
a measurement used to evaluate whether potential benefits outweigh potential risks (e.g., in a clinical trial).

RNA
see ribonucleic acid. 

ROFERON-A
brand name of interferon-alpha-2a.

RX
treatment.

S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE 
(SAM-E, METHIONINE) a natural compound found in cells and available as a nutritional supplement. 

SAFER SEX
sexual activities that reduce or eliminate the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, typically by blocking contact with semen and/or vaginal fluid. 

SALVAGE THERAPY
emergency treatment with experimental drugs for an illness that does not respond to standard therapy. 

SAM-E
see s-adenosylmethionine. 

SAMPLE SIZE
the number of participants in a clinical trial. 

SARCOIDOSIS
an autoimmune condition characterized by granulomas (small nodules of cells); the condition may affect the lungs, skin, eyes, liver, and other organs. 

SARGRAMOSTIM
see granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.

SCHISANDRA 
(WU WEI ZI) a plant used in traditional Chinese and Russian medicine to treat liver conditions.

SCLERODERMA
an autoimmune condition characterized by hardened skin and connective tissue. 

SEIZURE
a burst of abnormal electrical activity in the brain. 

SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITOR 
(SSRI) a psychotropic drug (e.g., Prozac, Zoloft) used to relieve depression; SSRI drugs act by moderating levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin. 

SELENIUM
a trace mineral that acts as an antioxidant. 

SEMEN
male ejaculatory fluid containing sperm and various proteins. 

SENSITIVITY
the ability of an organism to respond to a drug or other agent. Sensitivity also refers to a statistical measure of the accuracy of a screening test, that is, how likely a test is to label as positive those who have a disease or condition. Contrast with specificity. 

SEPSIS
infection. 

SEROCONVERSION
the development of antibodies against a pathogen; the change in a person's antibody status from negative to positive. 

SERONEGATIVE
lack of antibodies against a pathogen in the blood. 

SEROPOSITIVE
presence of antibodies against a pathogen in the blood. 

SEROSTATUS
the presence or absence of antibodies against a pathogen in the blood. 

SERUM
the fluid, noncellular portion of blood that remains after coagulation; lymphatic fluid. See also plasma. 

SERUM HEPATITIS
see hepatitis B. 

SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE 
(STD, SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTION, STI, VENEREAL DISEASE) a disease (e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, herpes, HIV) that is transmitted through sexual contact. 

SGOT
serum oxaloacetic transaminase. See aspartate aminotransferase.

SGPT
serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase. See alanine aminotransferase. 

SHEDDING
release of infectious particles (e.g., bacteria, viruses) into the environment. 

SHO-SAIKO-TO
a traditional herbal liver formula containing bupleurum. 

SIALADENITIS
Sialadenitis is an inflammatory disease that causes dry mouth and eyes and is associated with hepatitis C infection. Sialadenitis destroys the salivary glands. 

SIDE EFFECT
see adverse reaction. 

SILIBIN
an active component of milk thistle.

SILYMARIN
see milk thistle. 

SIMEPREVIR
(brand name OLYSIO) is used to treat chronic hepatitis C in combination with pegylated interferon and ribavirin. Simeprevir is a hepatitis C virus protease inhibitor. Simeprevir plus sofosbuvir and ribavirin is used to treat genotype 1. 

SINUSOIDS
cavities through hepatic or liver tissue allowing exchange of nutrients and other substances between blood and hepatocytes (liver cells). 

SJÖGREN'S SYNDROME
an autoimmune disorder in which the immune system attacks fluid-producing exocrine glands, leading to dry eyes, mouth, vagina, etc. 

SOC
see standard of care.

SODIUM
an element and electrolyte and a component of salt that helps to regulate cell fluid balance. 

SOFOSBUVIR
(brand names HARVONI SOVALDI) is used to treat chronic hepatitis C.

SOVALDI
see sofosbuvir. 

SQ
see subcutaneous.

SPECIFICITY
a statistical measure of the accuracy of a screening test.  Specificity measures the proportion of negatives which are correctly identified (e.g., the percentage of healthy people who are correctly identified as not having the condition).  Contrast with sensitivity. 

SPIDER ANGIOMA
a mass of visible veins on the skin surface; may be a symptom of chronic liver damage. 

SPLEEN
an immune system organ located in the abdominal cavity. The spleen produces blood cell in the fetus, and later removes old red blood cells and platelets from circulation. 

SPLENOMEGALY
enlargement of the spleen. 

SPONTANEOUS BACTERIAL PERITONTIS
bacterial infection of ascitic fluid in the abdominal cavity.

SSRI
see selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. 

STANDARD INTERFERON
the type of interferon-alpha traditionally used to treat HCV. Brand names include Intron-A and Roferon-A.  Also see pegylated interferon.

STANDARD OF CARE
the level of care that all persons with a particular illness should receive; the level below which care would be considered substandard. 

STANDARD THERAPY
the best or most widely used currently available treatment for a disease. 

STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE
the probability that a clinical trial result is not due to chance alone. In general, a result of a clinical trial is considered statistically significant if there is a less than 5% probability that the difference observed would occur by chance alone if the treatments being compared were equally effective. 

STI
see sexually transmitted disease. 

STD
see sexually transmitted disease. 

STEATOSIS
buildup of fat tissue in the liver. 

STENOSIS
narrowing or tightening of an opening or passage in the body. 

STEROID
a family of substances that share a similar chemical structure, including certain hormones (e.g., testosterone) and various drugs.

STROKE 
(CEREBROVASCULAR ACCIDENT) interruption of the normal flow of blood to the brain due to a blood clot or hemorrhage. Lack of blood flow can lead to brain damage (resulting in symptoms such paralysis) and death.

SUBCLINICAL
disease symptoms that are too subtle to be noticed by a patient, but may be apparent in laboratory results. 

SUBCUTANEOUS 
(SQ) underneath the skin; usually refers to a drug injected under the skin. 

SUBJECT
a volunteer participant in a clinical trial. 

SUBTHERAPEUTIC
a drug dosage that is too low to be effective.

SUBTYPE
a genetic variation of an organism. Subtypes are a more narrow classification than genotypes, but broader than quasispecies. Genotype 1 HCV is divided into subtypes 1a and 1b. 

SUPERINFECTION
the acquisition of a second infection while a previous infection is still present. 

SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE
an enzyme that destroys free radicals.

SUPPLEMENT
a nutrient, usually in pill form, taken in addition to the normal diet. 

SUPPORT GROUP
a group of peers with a common condition that meet for mutual emotional support or education. 

SURROGATE MARKER
see endpoint. 

SUSCEPTIBLE
vulnerable to or potentially able to contract a disease. Also refers to a microorganism that is vulnerable or sensitive to the effects of a drug. 

SUSTAINED RESPONDER
a person who maintains a long-term response to treatment. In HCV, a sustained responder has a long-term response (e.g., normal ALT levels, undetectable HCV RNA) that persists after treatment is stopped. 

SUSTAINED VIROLOGICAL RESPONSE (SVR) HCV RNA is undetectable at Week 24 post-treatment.  Also called a viral cure. 

SVR
see sustained virological response


SVR12
no virus detected at 12 weeks after completion of treatment. 

SVR24
no virus detected at 24 weeks after completion of treatment. 

SYMMETREL
see amantadine. 

SX
see symptoms.

SYMPTOM 
(SX) any perceptible change in the anatomy or function of the body that indicates the presence of a disease or condition.

SYMPTOMATIC
showing outward signs or symptoms of a disease. 

SYNDROME
a set of symptoms or disease manifestations that occur together. 

SYNERGY (SYNERGISM, adjective SYNERGISTIC) an interaction between drugs that produces an effect greater than the expected additive effect of the different drugs used separately. 

SYNERGISTIC EFFECT
The interaction of two or more drugs such that their combined effect is greater than the sum of the individual effects when each drug is administered alone.

SYSTEMIC
affecting the whole body. 

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS 
(LUPUS) an autoimmune disease characterized by inflammation of connective tissue throughout the body, especially in the joints. 

SYNTHESIS
production. 

TACE
see transcatheter arterial chemoembolization.

T'AI CHI
a traditional Chinese exercise that promotes the health flow of qi. 

TAURINE
an amino acid synthesized by the liver that is necessary for many bodily functions. 

T-CELL 
(T-LYMPHOCYTE) a type of immune system white blood cell. 

TELAPREVIR
(brand name Incivek) an HCV protease inhibitor (taken in combination with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin) previously used to treat people with HCV genotype 1.

TELBIVUDINE 
(Brand name TYZEKA) A nucleoside analogue medicine used to treat chronic hepatitis B. Telbivudine is not recommended as first line of HBV treatment because of the high rate of drug resistance. 

TENOFOVIR
(Brand name VIREAD) a nucleoside analogue medicine used to treat chronic hepatitis B and HIV. Tenofovir has a low drug resistance profile so it is recommended as a first line of treatment. 

TERATOGENICITY
causing birth defects or malformation of the fetus. 

TERMINATED
a study that has been stopped or discontinued before completion.  

TESTOSTERONE
the primary male sex hormone or a synthetic analog. Testosterone stimulates the development of male secondary sex characteristics and the production of sperm.

THIOCTIC ACID
see alpha lipoic acid. 

THISYLIN
an active component of milk thistle. 

THROMBOCYTE
(PLATELET) a type of blood cell responsible for normal blood clotting. 

THROMBOCYTOPENIA
an abnormally low number of platelets, which may result in abnormal bleeding and easy bruising. 

THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA
a condition caused by a lack of platelets. Small blood vessels under the skin bleed, resulting in purplish discolorations. 

THROMBOPOIETIN 
(TPO) a cytokine that stimulates the production of platelets. 

THROMBOSIS
development of blood clots within blood vessels or the heart. 

THYMIC FACTOR
a hormone produced by the thymus gland or a synthetic substance that has a similar effect. Thymic factors help promote immune system activity, and are under study as a treatment for HCV. Factors include thymosin, thymopentin, and thymopoietin. 

THYMOPOIETIN
see thymic factor. 

THYMOPENTIN
see thymic factor.

THYMUS GLAND
a gland in the chest that plays an important role in immune system function; the gland is active in children, but less so in adults. 

THYROID GLAND
an organ at base of the neck that produces thyroxin and other hormones involved in regulating metabolism. 

THYROIDITIS
inflammation of the thyroid gland. 

TID
taken three times daily. 

TINNITUS
ringing or buzzing in the ears. 

TMA
see transcripton mediated amplification. 

TOCOPHERAL
see vitamin E. 

TOLERABILITY
the degree to which a drug or other agent produces adverse side effects.

TOPICAL
a medication applied to the skin surface. 

TOXICITY 
(adjective TOXIC) the quality of being poisonous or harmful; often used to refer to drug side effects. 

TOXIN
a harmful or poisonous agent. 

TRACE ELEMENT
a substance needed in very small amounts for the proper functioning of the body. 

TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE 
(TCM) an ancient Asian system of healing that focuses on achieving internal balance. TCM practitioners use methods such as acupuncture, moxibustion, herbal formulas, and exercises such as t'ai chi and qigong to restore the flow of qi (vital energy) within the body. 

TRANSAMINASE
see aminotransferase. 

TRANSCATHETER ARTERIAL CHEMOEMBOLIZATION 
(TACE) a treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma that involves the injection of chemotherapeutic drugs into the tumor's blood supply. 

TRANSCRIPTION 
(verb TRANSCRIBE) the process of copying genetic material.

TRANSCRIPTON MEDIATED AMPLIFICATION 
(TMA) a recently developed, highly sensitive viral load test. 

TRANSFUSION
the transfer of blood or blood components from one individual to another (or back to the donor, in the case of autologous transfusion). 

TRANSIENT
short-lived; not permanent. 

TRANSJUGULAR LIVER BIOPSY
a type of liver biopsy in which a sample is taken through the jugular vein in the neck. 

TRANSMISSION
spread of a pathogenic organism from one person to another.

TRANSPLANT
surgical transfer of an organ from one person to another.

TRANSIENT ELASTOGRAPHY
 see FIBROSCAN 

TREATMENT-EXPERIENCED
a person who has had prior treatment for a particular condition. 

TREATMENT-NAIVE
a person who has never been treated. 

TREATMENT RESPONSE
a favorable outcome from therapy. Several different measures are used to describe HCV treatment response, including biochemical response, histological response, end-of-treatment response, and sustained virological response. 

TRIAL
see clinical trial. 

TRIGLYCERIDE
an organic compound made up of a fatty acid plus glycerol. 

TROUGH LEVEL
the lowest level of a drug reached between doses. Contrast with peak level. 

TSH
thyroid stimulating hormone.

T-SUPPRESSOR CELL
a type of T-cell that helps to regulate and control immune system activity. 

TUMOR
an abnormal growth of cells. Tumors may be malignant (cancerous) or benign (harmless).

TWINRIX
brand name of a combination hepatitis A/hepatitis B vaccine.

TX
treatment, transplant.

TYPE 1 DIABETES
see diabetes mellitus. 

TYPE 2 DIABETES
see diabetes mellitus. 

ULTRA-RAPID VIROLOGICAL RESPONSE 
(URVR) undetectable HCV RNA at Week 2 of treatment.

ULTRASONOGRAPHY 
(ULTRASOUND) a method of visualizing the internal parts of the body, or a fetus within the uterus, using sound waves. 

UNBLINDED
see blinding. 

UNCONTROLLED TRIAL
a clinical trial in which all participants receive the experimental treatment and none receive a standard treatment or placebo for comparison. 

UNDETECTABLE 
(UNQUANTIFIABLE) a term used to describe a viral load (amount of viral RNA) that is below the level of detection of the test being used. 

UNIVARIATE ANALYSIS
a statistical analysis that takes into account a single factor or variable. 

UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS
techniques used by health-care providers (e.g., use of gloves and face masks, proper disposal of used syringes) to prevent the spread of infectious diseases. 

UNOS 
(United Network of Organ Sharing) a non-profit organization that runs the Organ Procurement and Transplant Network which oversees the fair distribution of organs for transplantation. 

VACCINE
a preparation administered to stimulate an immune response to protect a person from illness. A vaccine typically includes a small amount of a killed or inactivated microorganism, or genetically engineered pieces. A therapeutic (treatment) vaccine is given after infection and is intended to reduce or stop disease progression. A preventive (prophylactic) vaccine is intended to prevent initial infection. 

VARICEAL HEMORRHAGE
bleeding from stretched and weakened blood vessels, especially in the esophagus or stomach. 

VARICES (adjective VARICEAL) an abnormally dilated or swollen vein, artery, or lymph vessel resulting from portal hypertension. 

VASCULITIS
blood vessel inflammation. 

VEIN
Any of the membranous tubes that form a branching system and carry blood to the heart from other organs.

VERTICAL TRANSMISSION 
(PERINATAL TRANSMISSION) transmission from a mother to a fetus or newborn. Vertical transmission may occur in utero (in the womb), intrapartum (during birth), or postpartum (e.g., via breast-feeding). 

VICTRELIS 
(brand name boceprevir) an HCV protease inhibitor taken in combination with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin that was previously used to treat people with HCV genotype 1.

VIRAL CURE
see sustained virological response. 

VIRAL HEPATITIS
a type of hepatitis caused by a virus. The most common types are hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C.

VIRAL LOAD
the amount of virus in the blood or other tissues, usually expressed in terms of copies of viral genetic material (RNA or DNA). The presence of genetic material indicates that a virus is actively replicating. 

VIRAL LOAD TEST
an assay that measures viral load; the bDNA, PCR, and TMA tests are most often used to determine HCV viral load. 

VIRAL RESPONSE
see virological response.

VIREMIA 
(adjective VIREMIC) the presence of a virus in the blood. 

VIRION
a complete virus particle. 

VIROLOGICAL FAILURE
failure of a treatment to suppress a virus. 

VIROLOGICAL RESPONSE
reduction in viral replication in response to treatment. In HCV, a complete virological response means that a person's HCV RNA becomes undetectable with treatment. 

VIROLOGY
the study of viruses and diseases caused by viruses.

VIRULENCE 
(adjective VIRULENT) aggressiveness, ability to cause disease. 

VIRUS
a microscopic infectious organism that is unable to grow or replicate outside of a host cell. Viruses integrate their genetic material (DNA or RNA) into a host cell and take over the cell's biological mechanisms to reproduce new virus particles. 

VITAMIN
an organic substance that acts as a coenzyme or regulator of metabolic processes; vitamins are crucial for many vital bodily functions. 

VITAMIN A
a fat-soluble vitamin synthesized from beta carotene within the body that has antioxidant properties and is important for proper immune system functioning. Excess vitamin A can be toxic to the liver. 

VITAMIN B
a complex of several important vitamins including B1 (thiamin), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), B6 (pyridoxine), and B12 (cobalamin). 

VITAMIN B12 
(COBALAMIN) a vitamin needed for red blood cell production and DNA synthesis and repair. Vitamin B12 deficiency may result in anemia, neurological dysfunction, and changes in mental status. 

VITAMIN C 
(ASCORBIC ACID) an antioxidant vitamin that protects cells from oxidative damage. Vitamin C deficiency may result in poor healing, easy bruising and anemia. 

VITAMIN D
a fat-soluble vitamin that is important for mineral metabolism and which may play a role in immune function. Excess vitamin D can be toxic to the liver. 

VITAMIN E 
(TOCOPHEROL) an antioxidant vitamin that protects cell membranes from oxidative damage. 

VITAMIN K
a substance important for blood clotting. 

VITAMIN P
see bioflavinoid. 

VITILIGO
a condition in which there is loss of pigmentation – usually around the mouth, eyes, nose, elbows, knees and wrists. 

WASHOUT PERIOD
the time it takes for a drug to be cleared from the body after it is discontinued. 

WASTING SYNDROME
a condition characterized by atrophy of lean body mass and involuntary weight loss. 

WATER-SOLUBLE
capable of being dissolved in water. Contrast with fat-soluble. 

WBC
white blood cell. See leukocyte. 

WELLFERON
brand name of lymphoblastoid interferon-alpha-n1. 

WESTERN BLOT
an antibody test used to confirm a positive ELISA test for HIV. 

WESTERN MEDICINE
allopathic medicine; the type of medical practice. 

WHITE BLOOD CELL 
(WBC) see leukocyte. 

WILSON'S DISEASE
a hereditary disorder affecting copper metabolism. 

WINDOW PERIOD
the time between exposure to a microorganism and the production of sufficient antibodies to be detected on a test. 

WNL
within normal limits. 

XENOGRAFT 
(XENOTRANSPLANT) a transplant of an organ or tissue from a different species. 

Abdomen
The main body cavity between the chest and the groins. 

Abrasion
Scraping of the skin  

Abscess
Collection of pus in cavity  

Acetonemia
A disorder of metabolism which results in high levels of acetone in blood. Also known as ketosis Modern) 

Acetonuria
A disorder of metabolism which results in high levels of acetone in the urine. Also known as ketonuria  

Acholia
Absence of bile, associated with jaundice  

Achondroplasia
Dwarfism  

Acidosis
Increased acidity of blood 

Acid urine
Increased acidity of urine 

Acnathosis
Thickened skin  

Acne
Inflammation of the glands of the skin, causing formation of pustules, usually on the face  

Addisons Disease
Severe disease of kidney causing incurable anaemia and bronzed colouration of the skin  

Adenitis
Inflammation of lymph glands (lymph nodes)  

Adenoids
Inflammation of the small gland-like appendages at the back of the nose 

Adenoma
Benign tumour of a gland  

Adherent
Often post-operative condition whereby scar tissue becomes stuck to the bone in the joint. 

Ague & sequela
Intermittent fever, in which there are alternating periods of chills and fever  

Albuminuria
A disease of the kidneys marked by appearance of albumin in the urine.  

Alkaptonuria
A rare genetic metabolic disorder  

Alopecia
Absence of hair, baldness  

Amaurosis
Blindness caused by loss of nerve power  

Amblyopia
Indistinct vision  Lazy eye  

Amentia
Absence of intellect  

Amyloid
Degeneration of tissues, often of the liver  

Amyloid liver
Degeneration of the liver  

Amyotonia
Lack of muscle tone  

Anaemia
Deficiency of red blood cells  

Anasarca
Accumulation of watery fluid in the tissues, leading to swelling  

Anencephaly
Congenital deformity of the brain  

Aneurism
A tumour of an artery due to location dilatation usually with rupture of lining.  A localized, blood-filled dilation (balloon-like bulge) of a blood vessel caused by disease or weakening of the vessel wall  

Angina
Pain in the heart region  

Angioma
Tumour composed of blood vessels  

Ankylosis
Bony union of joint after injury or disease  

Anorexia
Lack of appetite or abhorrence of food  

Anuria
Suppression of urine  

Aphasia
Loss of ability to use or recognise the correct words, although words are known  

Aphemia
Inability to use the muscles of speech  

Aphonia
Loss of voice  

Appendectomy
Operation to remove appendix  

Appendicitis
Inflammation of the appendix, a small rudimentary attachment to the large intestine. 

Appendix
Appendage of intestines  

Arch foot
Abnormally high instep 

Artery
Blood vessel which carries blood away from the heart 

Arthrectomy
Scraping of a joint  (usually when infected eg by tubercular infection) 

Arthritis
Inflammation of joints  

Arthritis gonorrhoeal
Arthritis (inflammation of joints) associated with gonorrhoea, a venereal disease 

Arthritis rheumatoid
Inflammation of joints  

Arthrodesis
Surgical fusion of a joint to relieve pain  

Ascaris lumbracoides
Worm infestation  

Ascites
Swelling of abdomen caused by accumulation of fluid  

Asphyxia
Unconsciousness or suffocation  

Asthenia
Loss of strength, debility  

Asthma
Difficulty in breathing with a sense of suffocation. Thought to be nervous in origin.  

Astigmatism
Unequal refractive power of the eye  

Ataxy
Impaired gait in walking  

Ataxy cerebellar
Impaired gait in walking  associated with disorder of the lower brain. 

Atelectasis
Failure of lungs at birth  

Atheroma
A soft pap-like tumour; also fatty degeneration of blood vessels  

Athetosis
A continuous stream of slow, sinuous, writhing movements, typically of the hands and feet . 

Athrodesis
Surgical fusion of a joint to relieve pain  

Atony 
Lack of muscle tone  

Atresia
Constriction of tube or canal 

Atrophy
Wasting  

Aural
Of the ear 

Axilla
The arm-pit 

Bacillaemia
Bacteria in the blood  

Bacilluria
Bacteria in the urine  

Balanitis
Inflammation of the glans penis  

Bantis disease
Enlarged spleen  

Bayles Disease
Severe form of neurosyphilis  

Bells Palsy
Paralysis of facial muscles resulting in distorted facial expression  

Bile ducts 
Carry bile from liver to intestine 

Bilious attack
Digestive disturbance  

Birthmark
Discolouration of the skin present at birth  

Blepharitis
Inflammation of the eyelids  

Brights Disease
Disease of the kidney, associated with dropsy and albuminuria  

Brittle bone disease
Condition where bones are very fragile and break easily (also known as Osteogenesis imperfecta)  

Bronchial
Relating to the tubes in the lungs 

Bronchiectasis
Characterised by localised irreversible dilation of part of the lung, often referred to as obstructive lung disease  

Bronchiolitis
Inflammation of the bronchioles, the smallest air passages in the lungs  

Bronchitis
Inflammation of the bronchial tubes.  

Bronchopneumonia
Inflammation of the bronchi (the small tubes in the lungs) and the lungs  

Bulimia
Excessive appetite  

Bursa
A bursa is a sac containing fluid  located within joints to facilitate movement. 

Bursitis
A bursa is a sac containing fluid  located within joints to facilitate movement. They can become inflamed (bursitis) rendering movement of the joint painful. 

Calculus
Commonly referred to as 'the stone', most often found in the bladder (Calculus vesica)  

Calculus vesicae/vesical
Commonly referred to as 'the stone', most often found in the bladder (Calculus vesica)  

Cancer
A malignant growth  

Cancrum oris
Ulceration of the mouth, associated with ill-fed children.  

Carcinoma
Malignant tumour  

Carditis
Inflammation of the heart  

Carditis rheumatic
Inflammation of the heart associated with rheumatic fever.  

Caries
Decay of bone  

Catalepsy
A trance-like state, where limbs will remain in any position they are placed  

Cataract
Opaqueness of the lens of the eye  

Cataract lamellar
Opaqueness of the lens of the eye  

Catarrh
Inflammation of mucous membranes accompanied by increased secretions - usually in the nose (as in the common cold) but can be applied to internal organs as well. 

Cellulitis
Inflammation of the cellular tissue (the tissue located immediately beneath the skin)  

Cephalalgia
Headache  

Cephalhaematoma
Bloody tumour on the head of an infant  Now known to be caused by haemorrhage  

Cerebellar/Cerebellum
The lower part of the brain  

Cerebral/Cerebrum
The largest part of brain  

Cerebrospinal
Condition affecting brain and spinal cord 

Cervical
Refers to the neck region  

Cervical adenitis
Inflammation of lymph gland (node) in neck  

Cheiropomphylax
Skin disease of hands and feet characterised by appearance of itchy blisters  

Chicken Pox & sequela
Also known as Varicella. Infectious fever characterised by a rash on the chest which develops into very itchy pimples.  

Chilblains
Small itchy red swollen areas of the skins, which arise after exposure to cold. 

Chloasma
Discolouration of the skin  

Chlorosis
Also known as green sickness, a 'peculiar form of anaemia' associated with females around puberty. Causes weakness, faintness, and rapid pulse on exertion . 

Cholaemia
Presence of bile in the blood, often a sign of liver disease.  

Chondroma 
Benign tumour involving cartilage  

Chorea
Also known as St Vitus Dance. Involuntary twitchings of the muscles, most common in children, who generally grow out of it.  

Choroiditis
Inflammation of the choroid, one of the membranes which line the eyeball.  

Cicatrix 
Scar of a healed wound  

Circumcision
Removal of part of the prepuce, the loose skin which covers the penis (the foreskin)  

Cirrhosis
A granular state of an organ, most often the liver, when it is generally produced by consumption of alcohol  

Clavicle
Collar bone  

Cleft jaw
Extreme form of hare lip where the split in the lip extends through into the bone of the jaw.  

Cleft palate
A congenital split in the roof of the mouth so that the nose and mouth form one cavity. An operation can be carried out to close the split. Often but not always accompanied by hare lip.  

Cleft palate hare lip
A combination of congenital deformities of the mouth where the roof of the mouth does not close and there is a slit or cleft in the upper lip which can extend through the jaw bone. An operation or combination of operations can be performed to rectify the deformity, but it usually left a very visible scar.  

Clitoritis
Small organ of erectile tissue found in females in the pubic region.  

Club foot
Also known Talipes. A turning of the foot in the wrong direction. There are several different forms: the main ones being Talipes valgus: the foot turns outwards; varus, the foot turns inwards; equinus, the heel is lifted from the ground.  The condition can exist at birth or be acquired during life. 

Coccyx
Last bone in the spine 

Coeliac
Relates to the cavity in which the intestines sit  In modern times this term refers to a specific autoimmune disease of the small intestines.  

Colic
Pain in the abdomen  

Colic renal
Pain in the kidneys  

Colitis
Inflammation of the colon  

Coliuria
Presence of E. coli bacteria in the urine  

Collapse pulmonary
Deflation of a lung 

Colon
Part of the large intestine  

Colotomy
An incision made in the colon (the large intestine) in cases of obstruction, fistula, cancer or ulceration of the rectum.  

Congenital
Disease or deformity present at birth  

Congested brain
Used in connection with brain fever or any form of delirium 

Congested liver
A torpid stagnation of the blood in the liver  

Congested lung
A torpid stagnation of the blood in the lungs, can be used to refer to bronchopneumonia  

Conjuctiva
Membrane which covers the eye lid and cornea  

Conjunctivitis
Inflammation and irritation of the eye  

Conjunctivitis phlyctenular
Inflammation and irritation of the eye accompanied by phlyctaena, small fluid filled blisters  

Consolidated lung
Condition in which the tissue of the lungs becomes solid and firm rather than elastic and air-filled  

Constipation
Indolent state of the bowels , or infrequent bowel movements  

Contraction of pylorus congenital
Born with the exit of the stomach into the intestines constricted 

Convulsion intestine
Violent spasm of the intestines  

Convulsions
Violent spasm of alternate muscular contraction and relaxation  

Cornea
The transparent covering of the front of the eye  

Corneal opacity
Cloudiness of the cornea: the usually transparent covering of the front of the eye  

Corneitis
Inflammation of the cornea: the transparent covering of the front of the eye  

Coryza
Cold in the head  

Cranial
Relating to the skull  

Craniectomy
Removal of part of skull to create room for a swelling brain  

Cretinism/Cretin
Imperfect mental faculties and small stature often accompanied by swelling in the throat region (goitre)  

Croaking
Problems speaking 

Croup & sequela
Acute inflammation of the larynx (or voice box)  

Cryptorchidism
Absence of one or both testes from the scrotal sac, usually the result of undescended testes  

Cyanosis
Blue colour to the skin, resulting from congestion in the venous circulation of the blood 

Cynanche
Sore throat or inflammation of the tonsils  

Cyst
A membranous sac-like structure containing fluid  

Cyst dermoid
An encapsulated tumour which has developed structures such has hair and teeth within it.  

Cystitis
Inflammation of the bladder  

Dacrocystitis
Inflammation of the duct which drains tears out of the eye  

Dactylitis
A syphilitic swelling of the fingers and toes, syphilitic - a symptom of syphilis.  Modern definitions associate dactylitis with several different conditions including tuberculosis.  

Debility
Weakness or loss of muscular power.  

Debility nervous
Weakness or loss of muscular power, related to a nervous disorder  

Defective development
Slow physical development 

Deficiency cerebral
Mental impairment 

Delirium
Extravagant talking, raving generally due to high fever.  

Dementia
Feebleness of mental faculties, the last stage of insanity.  

Dermatitis
Inflammation of the skin  

Dermatomyositis
Inflammation of the skin and muscles  

Dermoid
An encapsulated tumour which has developed structures such has hair and teeth within it.  

Desquamation
Peeling off of the skin. Desquamation occurs after scarlet fever and is when the patient is most infectious  

Diabetes
A disease marked by an excessive flow of saccharine urine.  

Diaphragm
The muscle which separates the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity  

Diaphysitis
Inflammation of the shaft of a long bone  

Dilated ureter
Ureter: the canal which carried urine from the kidney to the bladder.  

Dilated Ureter
Ureter: the canal which carried urine from the kidney to the bladder.  

Diphtheria & sequela
Infectious inflammation of the throat, with the formation of a false membrane which tends to close the throat and cause suffocation . A common disease of childhood in 19th century but rarely seen in modern times in Western medicine . 

Diphtheria & Sequela
Infectious inflammation of the throat, with the formation of a false membrane which tends to close the throat and cause suffocation . A common disease of childhood in 19th century but rarely seen in modern times in Western medicine . 

Diphtheritic paralysis
Paralysis of various types occurring after diphtheria infection. 

Diphtheritic Paralysis
Paralysis of various types occurring after diphtheria infection. 

Diplegia
A form of paralysis which primarily affects the legs  

Disseminated sclerosis
Now better known as multiple sclerosis, a condition affecting nerves in the spinal cord and brain  

Diuresis
Increased flow of urine  

Diverticulitis
A disease of the large intestine  

Dorsal
Relates to the back 

Dropsy
Accumulation of fluid in the cavities of the body, often seen towards the end of cases of cancer, heart disease etc. Now more commonly referred to as oedema 

Duchennes Paralysis
Progressive locomotor ataxy, or impaired gait in walking  

Dysentery
Inflammation of the large intestine accompanied by bloody evacuations.  

Dyspepsia
Indigestion  

Dysphagia
Difficulty in swallowing  

Dyspnoea
Difficult breathing  

Dystrophy muscular
Now known to be a hereditary condition in which the muscles of the body grow progressively weaker  

Dysuria
Difficulty in discharging urine  

Ecchymosis
Bruising  caused by leakage of blood from blood vessels into surrounding tissues  

Eclampsia
Convulsions in infants often ending in epilepsy  also known as Salaam convulsions  Probably refers to condition now referred to as West Syndrome  

Ecthyma
A pustular disease of the skin, not contagious 

Ectopia cordis
Condition in which the heart is displaced, usually through the wall of chest cavity, resent at birth.  

Ectopia vesicae
Condition in which development of the bladder is incomplete at birth  

Ectropion
Turning out of the eyelid  

Eczema
Non-contagious, but often unpleasant, eruption on the skin which causes great irritation. 

Eczema capitis
Skin eruption of the scalp  

Effusion
Accumulation of fluid in body cavities, often relates to fluid in the spaces between the membranes lining the lungs (pleura)  

Elephantiasis
A skin disease causing terrible enlargement of affected limbs. The skin resembles an elephant's hide. Caused by a parasite.  

Embolism
Coagulation of the blood into a clot.  

Emesis
Vomiting  

Emphysema
Swelling produced by air, a dropsy is caused by fluid.  A long term progressive disease of the lungs caused by collapse of lung structures which make exhaling difficult. 

Empyema
A collection of pus in one or both cavities of the pleura (membranes lining the lungs). - Not to be confused with emphysema. 

Encephalitis
Inflammation of the brain  

Encephalocele
Protrusion of the brain through the skull  

Endocarditis
Inflammation of the membrane lining the inside of the heart  

Endopericarditis
Inflammation of both the interior lining of the heart and the membranous sac in which the heart is enclosed.  

Enteric
Relating to the intestines 

Enterica
Typhoid Fever (possibly?) 

Enteritis
Inflammation of the small intestines, usually accompanied by diarrhoea  

Enterocolitis
Inflammation of the small intestines and the colon, the main part of the large intestines 

Entropion
Condition in which the eyelid turns inwards  

Enuresis
Involuntary discharge of urine  

Epididymitis
Inflammation of the small oblong body above the testes (male sex organs)  The tube which conveys sperm from the testes to the vas deferens and penis.  

Epilepsy
A disease of the brain marked by convulsive fits.  

Epiphysitis
Inflammation of the end of a bone (epiphysis, its growth point)  

Epispadias
Malformation of the penis  

Epistaxis
Nose bleed 

Erbs myopathy
A juvenile form of muscular dystrophy, now known to be an hereditary condition in which the muscles of the body grow progressively weaker  

Erbs palsy
Paralysis of the arms and shoulders caused by damage to nerves during birth  

Erysipelas & sequela
Contagious inflammation of the skin , often associated with surgery. 

Erythema nodosum
Non-contagious, inflammation of the skin  

Exophthalmus
Protruding eyeball  

Exostosis
Bony tumour growing from the bone  

Extroversion viscera
A deformity of the intestines 

Favus
Contagious disease of the scalp  

Femur
Large bone in upper leg; thigh bone  

Fibroadenoma
A benign mobile tumour often found in the breast  

Fibroid
A tumour composed of fibrous material  

Fibula
One of two small bones in lower leg  

Fissure anus
Tear in the skin of the anal canal  

Fistula
An unnatural passage by which an internal organs communicates with another, or with the body's exterior  

Follicle
Part of the skin which contains the root of a hair.  

Foreign body
Ingestion of a foreign body, often a penny or a needle 

Friedreichs ataxy
Hereditary paralysis  

Friedreichs cataract
Congenital cataract of the eye  

Functional ataxy
Impaired gait in walking  

Gall bladder
Membraneous sac which contains the bile  

Ganglion
An enlargement of a nerve, or a swelling in the sheath of a tendon  

Gangrene
Death of a part of the body, begins with discolouration, usually of the toes.  

Gastric
Relating to the stomach 

Gastritis
Inflammation of the stomach  

Gastroenteritis
Inflammation of the stomach and intestines  

Gastrointestinal
Realting to the stomach and intestines 

Genitourinary organs
The combined organs of the urinary system and the sex organs 

Genu valgum
Another term for knock-knee  

Genu varum
Another term for bow legs  

Gigantism
Condition characterised by excessive growth and height significantly above average. Now known to be caused by excess production of growth hormone  

Gingivitis
Inflammation of the gums  

Gland
Small bodies found in different parts of the body  often used to refer to lymph nodes, which are part of the body's immune system.  

Glands axilla
Lymph gland (nodes) found in arm-pit  

Glands cervical
Lymph gland (nodes) found in neck region  

Glands groin
Lymph glands (nodes) found in the junction of the thighs and the trunk  

Glands perineum
Lymph glands (nodes) located in the space between the anus and the genital organs . 

Glaucoma
Inflammation of the eye, with hardening of the globe  Disease of the eye characterised by increased pressure within the eyeball which can lead to deterioration in sight.  

Glioma
A tumour arising from nerve cells  

Glioma psoas
A tumour arising from nerve cells in the lower back  

Glossitis
Inflammation of the tongue  

Gluteal
Refers to the buttocks  

Glycosuria
Glucose in the urine  

Goitre
Enlargement of the thyroid gland of the throat  

Gonorrhoea
Inflammation of the genitals, accompanies by flow of pus. Very contagious  

Granuloma
A mass of granular tissue usually associated with infection  

Graves disease
Enlargement of the thyroid gland of the throat with protrusion of the eyeballs  

Groin
The junction of the thighs and the trunk  

Haemarthrosis
Bleeding into a joint  

Haematemesis
Vomiting blood  

Haematocele
A tumour containing blood  

Haematoma
Blood clot outside the blood vessel, usually the result of haemorrhage  

Haematuria
Blood in the urine  

Haemoglobinuria
Haemoglobin in the urine 

haemophilia
A congenital tendency to haemorrrhage  

Haemophilia
A congenital tendency to haemorrrhage  

Haemoptysis
Coughing up blood from the lungs  

Haemorrhage
Bleeding 

Haemorrhoids
Piles  

Hallucination
Imaginary appearances, symptomatic of disease of the brain  

Hammer toe
Deformity of the toe, causing it t be permanently bent  

Hare lip
A congenital deformity of the mouth where there is a slit or cleft in the upper lip which can extend through the jaw bone. An operation can be performed to rectify the deformity, but it usually left a very visible scar.  

Hemikinesis
Spasms or twitching on one side of the body (BMJ 10 July 1875 p43) 

Hemiparesis
weakness on one side of the body  

Hemiplegia
Paralysis of one side of the body  

Henochs purpura
A serious skin disease marked by purple patches, caused by escape of blood into the skin.  

Hepatitis
Inflammation of the liver 

Hermaphrodite
A condition in which the genital organs are neither wholly male or female  

Hermaphroditism
A condition in which the genital organs are neither wholly male or female  

Hernia
Commonly called a rupture. The protrusion of any internal organ through the surrounding tissues, most commonly the bowels protruding through the abdominal wall.  

Herpes zoster
Acute inflammation of the skin usually called shingles  Now known to be caused by the virus Varicella zoster 

High arch
Abnormally high instep 

Hip Disease
Inflammation of the hip joint, most common in children and extremely painful, often accompanied by abscesses.  Although not specifically mentioned at time of recording, it is thought that many cases of hip disease were tubercular in origin. 

Hirschsprungs disease
Congenital malformation of the bowel  

Hirsutism
Condition in which body is abnormally hairy  

Hodgkins disease
General enlargement of the glands of the lymphatic system  

Hospitalism
Condition associated with prolonged stay and exposure to unwholesome state of the atmosphere in an ill-ventilated ort ill-kept institution'.  

Humerus
Bone of the upper arm  

Huntingdons chorea
A progressive neurodegenerative genetic disorder, which affects muscle coordination and leads to cognitive decline and dementia  

Hydatid
Watery tumour developed in any cavity of the body by the presence of a species of parasite. Most common in liver or lung.  

Hydrocele
Watery tumour usually found in the scrotum  

hydrocephalus
Water on the brain, causing the head to swell to enormous size.  

Hydromyelia
An accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid which can put abnormal pressure on the spinal cord causing pain and damage to nerves  

Hydronephrosis
Accumulation of fluid in the kidney  

Hygroma
Watery tumour  

Hyperaesthesia
Excess of feeling (sensation)  

Hypermetropia
Long sightedness  

Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
Excessive growth of the lower part of the stomach where it opens into the intestine, causing a narrowing of the outlet  

Hypertrophy
Excessive growth of a body part  

Hypertrophy pylorus
Excessive growth of the lower part of the stomach where it opens into the intestine  

Hypochondria
Slight melancholia, mental distress about health  

Hypopituitarism
Inability of the pituitary gland (situated at the base of the brain) to secrete sufficient levels of hormones.  

Hypopyon
Pus in the eye  

Hypospadias
Malformation of the lower wall of the urethra (the tube through urine is excreted from the body) in male children, present at birth  

Hypothyroidism
Insufficient production of thyroid hormone by the thyroid gland (located in the neck and produces hormones which influence metabolism among other activities) Can result in cretinism - a condition of severely stunted physical and mental growth  

Hysteria
A nervous disease sometimes marked by convulsive seizures and very often by dislike to food, painful impressions and untruthfulness  

Ichthyma
A skin disease  

Ichthyosis
Fish skin disease, so called because it resembles the hard scaliness of a fish  

Idiocy
Mental weakness which dates from birth, feeble-mindedness  

Ileum
Part of the large intestine  

Ilium
Hip bone  

Imbecility
Refers to a degree of mental retardation, worse than moron but above idiot. Lacking in the capacity to develop beyond the mental age of a normal five to seven-year-old child (Modern for Obsolete term) 

Imperforate anus
Absence of anal opening  

Imperforate hymen
Condition in which hymen completely closes the entrance to the vagina  

Imperforate oesophagus
Condition in which the oesophagus (the food tube) ends in closed pouch and is not connected to the stomach  

Imperforate rectum
Absence of anal opening  

Imperforate urethra
Absence of urethral opening (tube which normally carries urine outside the body)  

Imperforate vagina
Absence of vaginal opening  

Impetigo
A skin rash of an acute kind normally seen in weakly women and children  Now known to be caused by highly contagious staphylococcal bacteria  

Incontinence
Inability to control evacuation of the bladder  

Indigestion
Failure of the digestive powers  Also known as dyspepsia  

Induration femur
Hardening of the upper leg bone  

Infantile scurvy
Disease marked by dejection, anemia and haemorrhage, caused by want of fresh meat and vegetables  

Infantilism
An obsolete term for various, often unrelated, disorders which consist of retention of the physical and/or psychological characteristics of infancy or childhood  

Infarct cerebral
Tissue death due to lack of oxygen in the front brain  

Inguinal
Refers to lowest part of abdomen on either side of the pubic bone  

Insanity
Madness, disease of the brain causing loss of reason  

Intertrigo
Inflammation of the skin around the anus, axilla (arm pits) or groin  

Intussusception
A condition of the intestines in which one part slips inside another and causes obstruction of the bowel.  

Inverted bladder
A condition in which the bladder is turned inside out 

Iridemia 
Haemorrhage in the iris  

Iris
The coloured circle surrounding the dark pupil of the eye  

Iritis
Inflammation of the iris  

Ischiorectal
Refers to region in lower rear abdominal cavity  

Jaundice
Disease of the liver causing yellowness of the skin  

Kaposis disease
Extreme formation of freckles with tendency to ulcerate  The term now covers several conditions, including Kaposi's Sarcoma (caused by a virus) and linked to HIV infection, and a rare skin condition.  

Keloid 
A growth of the skin intermediate in character between a scar and a tumour.  

Keratitis
Inflammation of the cornea (the clear covering of the eye)  

Keratitis phlyctenular
Discrete nodular areas of inflammation of the cornea  

Kyphosis
Hump back, deformity of spine  

Labioglossal pouch
Condition involving the lips and tongue  

Labium/labia
Female genital organs 

Lachrymal
Referring to the tear ducts and the glands which secrete them  

Laminectomy
Operation involving the removal of part of a vertebral bone  

Languor
Lack of vigour or vitality  

Laparotomy
Operation to open the abdominal cavity, a serious operation  

Lardaceous disease
Degeneration of tissues until they resemble wax (usually the liver or kidneys)  

Laryngismus
Spasmodic or false croup (inflammation of the larynx and trachea) accompanied by a crowing noise.  

Leontiasis
Leprosy of the face  

Leprosy
A constitutional malignant disease, cutaneous in initial phase but later involving both tissue and bone.  Now known to be caused by a bacterium  

Leucocythaemia
Morbid increase in white blood cells, sometimes accompanied by haemorrhage, enlarged spleen and vomiting.  

Leucoderma
Skin condition in which white spots or patches appears (also known as vitiligo)  

Leucoma
A milky opacity of the cornea of the eye  

Leucorrhoea
A whitish discharge from the vagina, a sign of weakness.  Now known to have many causes, including oestrogen imbalance and infections. , 

Leukaemia
Increase in white blood cells  A cancer of the blood of blood marrow in which white blood cell counts are abnormally high.  

Lice
Infestation by biting insects  

Lichen
A skin disease in which striking feature is inflamed pimples  

Lipoma
A fatty tumour  

Lithaemia
Excess lithic (uric) acid in the blood producing gouty dyspepsia.  

Lithotomy
Operation for cutting into bladder to remove stone  

Lithuria
Passing gravel (small stones) in the urine  

Llarynx
Voice organ  voice box  

Lumbago
A rheumatic condition of the loins (the sides of the body and back below the ribs and above the pelvis)  

Lumbar
Lower back 

Lupus
A tuberculous disease of the skin, most common in children of consumptive or scrofulous tendency . Now known not to be a tubercular condition, but to be a form of auto-immune disease. 

Lymph
A colourless alkaline fluid found in the lymphatic vessels - the small vessels which pervade the body . 

Lymphadenitis
Inflammation of the lymphatic glands.  

Lymphadenoma
Enlarged lymph glands  

Lymphadentitis
Inflammation of the lymphatic glands.  

Lymphangiectasis
Dilation of the lymph vessels  often accompanied by diarrhoea, ascites and oedema  

Lymphangioma
Malformation of the lymphatic system 

Lymphangitis
Inflammation of the lymphatic channels abused by infection and sometimes called blood poisoning'  

Lymphasarcoma
A malignant cancer involving the lymph system  

Lymphatic
Referring to the system of small vessels pervading the body and carrying lymph.  

Lymphocythaemia
An excess of normal lymphocytes (white blood cells)  

Lymphoedema
Localised fluid retention and tissue swelling caused by dysfunctional lymphatic system  

Lymphoma
A solid tumor of lymphoid cells arising from the lymph system . 

Lymphosarcoma
A malignant tumour of lymphoid cells  

Macrocephaly
Very large headed  

Malaise
General feeling of discomfort  

Mania
Insanity, madness  

Marasmus
A wasting of the flesh, accompanied by loss of power, generally due to tubercular disease of the mesenteric gland (glands associated with membranes in the abdomen) . Associated most often these days with severe protein malnutrition.  

Mastitis
Inflammation of the breast  

Mastodynia
Pain in the breasts  

Mastoid
Mastoid (process): Bone at base of skull very closely connected to the ear  

Mastoiditis
Inflammation of the mastoid (process): Bone at base of skull very closely connected to the ear  

Mastoid (process)Bone at base of skull very closely connected to the ear  

Masturbation
Manual production of vicious excitement  

Measles & sequela
A common infectious disease of childhood still encountered today. 

Mediastinal/mediastinum
The space in the chest between the sacs which surround each lung . 

Mediastinitis
Inflammation of the tissues in the chest cavity known as the mediastinum  

Mediastinum
The space in the chest between the sacs which surround each lung . 

Melaena
Discharge of black blood from bowels  

Melancholia
Morbid depression, a form of insanity  

Meningismus
A group of symptoms similar to meningitis (stiff neck, reaction to light and headache) without inflammation of the membranes lining the brain  

Meningitis
Inflammation of the membranes of the brain and spinal cord, a serious disease which is often fatal. 

Meningocele
Protrusion of brain matter through the skull  

Mesenteric/mesentery
Membranes in the abdominal cavity  

Microcephalus
Abnormally small head  

Microphthalmus
Abnormally small eyes  

Micturition
Act of passing urine  

Migraine
Headache, usually known as sick headache, coming on periodically  

Mitral
Refers to one of the valves in the heart which separates the upper and lower left chambers  

Molluscum
Disease of the skin  

Mongolism
Congenital disorder, know known as Down's Syndrome, named after John Langdon Down who first described its symptoms in 1866  

Monoplegia
Paralysis of one limb  

Morbus cordis
Unspecified heart disease 

Morbus coxae
Unspecified disease of the hip. 

Mucocele
Sac like swelling filled with mucus  

Mucous membranes
Membranes which line body passages and cavities which are exposed to external environment, such as the mouth, eyes, nose. Some, like the nose, secrete mucus, a thick sticky fluid. 

Multiple sclerosis
A degenerative disease in which the linings of nerves in the brain and spinal cord deteriorate resulting a wide spectrum of symptoms  

Muscular atrophy
Wasting of muscles 

Muscular dystrophy
Inherited progressive weakness of muscles  

Myelitis
Inflammation of the spinal cord  

Myocarditis
Inflammation of the heart muscle, often following acute rheumatism  

Myoclonus
Brief involuntary twitching of muscles  

Myopathy
Muscular condition resulting in weakness  

Myopia
Short sightedness  

Myositis
Inflammation of skeletal muscles  

Myotonia
Condition in which muscles relax only slowly after contraction.  

Myotonia congenital
Condition in which muscles relax only slowly after contraction.  

Myxoedema
A jelly-like form of dropsy, with dry skin, lethargy and extreme susceptibility to cold  

Naevolipoma
Benign tumour of fatty tissue  

Naevus
Birth mark  

Nasal septum
The cartilage which separates the two nostrils of the nose  

Necrosis
Death of a part of the body, most often applied to bone.  

Nephritis
Inflammation of the kidney  

Nephrosis
Non-inflammatory disease of kidneys  

Neuralgia
Pain of a nerve  

Neurasthenia
Nervous exhaustion  

Neuritis
Inflammation of nerves  

Neurofibroma
Tumour of peripheral nervous system  

Neuroma
Tumour of peripheral nervous system  

Neuromimesis
Neurotic simulation of organic disease  

Neuropathy
Damage to the nervous system  

Neurosis
Disease of nervous system but with no obvious structural cause  

Noma
Ulceration of mouth or labia  

Nystagmus
Involuntary movement of the eyeball  

Observation
In hospital to be observed 

Occiput
Occiput: back of the skull  

Oedema
Swelling of a body tissues, caused by accumulation of fluid  

Oedema neonatorum
Swelling of a body tissues in the new born  

Oesophagismus
Condition affecting the tube which connects the stomach to the mouth  

Oesophagus
The canal which runs from the throat to the stomach  

Oesophagus congenital
Tube which carries food from mouth to stomach. 

Ophthalmia
Inflammation of the eye  

Ophthalmia neonatorum
Inflammation of the eye in the newborn  

Ophthalmitis
Inflammation of the eye  

Orbit
Cavity which holds the eye  

Orchitis
Inflammation of the testes (male organs of generation)  

Os calcis
Heel bone  

Osteitis
Inflammation of the bone  

Osteoarthritis
Inflammation of the bones and joints  

Osteomalacia
Softening of the bones  

Osteomyelitis
Inflammation of the soft tissue of the bone  

Osteotomy
Operation on a bone, generally breaking and resetting as in bow legs.  

Otitis
Inflammation of the inner ear  

Otitis interna
Inflammation of the internal ear  

Otitis media
Inflammation of the middle ear  

Otitis media suppurating
Inflammation of the middle ear , with production of pus  

Otorrhoea
A purulent discharge from the ear.  

Pachymeningitis
A form of meningitis  

Palate
Roof of mouth  

Palsy
Popular name for paralysis  

Panophthalmitis
Inflammation of all tissues of the eyeball  

Panophthlamia
Inflammation of all tissues of the eyeball  

Papilloma
Small surface tumours 

Paracentesis
Operation performed on chest or abdomen to discharge fluid accumulated in dropsy patients  

Paralysis
A total or partial loss of sensation and power of movement., often only affecting a specific part of the body. 

Paralysis infantile
Occurs in weakly children under 4 years; legs being usually affected.  A probable synonym for poliomyelitis. 

Paralysis Infantile
Occurs in weakly children under 4 years; legs being usually affected.  A probable synonym for poliomyelitis. 

Paralysis pseudohypertrophic 
A form of neuromuscular paralysis, predisposition to which appears to be inherited  The diagnosis seems to have passed out of modern use. 

Paraplegia
Paralysis of the lower half of the body  

Parasitic foetus
Result of incomplete separation of twin embryos in the uterus. One embryo develops at the expense of the other, which ceases to grow and is vestigial to a mostly fully-formed, otherwise healthy individual twin at birth.  

Paresis
A slight form of paralysis  

Parietal bone
One of the bones of the skull 

Parotid
Salivary gland situated near the ear and implicated in mumps  

Parotitis
Mumps  

Patellar
Knee cap 

Pemphigus
Skin disease marked by eruptions of large blisters  

Pericarditis
Inflammation of the out6er coat of the heart  

Pericardium
Membrane surrounding heart  

Perineal/perineum
The space between the anus and the genital organs  

Periosteal/Periosteum
Membrane which covers bone  

Periosteitis
Inflammation of the membrane covering a bone  

Peritoneal/Peritoneum
Membrane which encloses intestines  

Peritonitis
Inflammation of the peritoneum, the membrane which holds the intestines in the abdomen.  

Perityphlitis
Inflammation of the membrane around the caecum (part of the intestines)  

Phagadaena
Ulcers or wounds which spread rapidly.  

Pharyngismus
Spasm of muscles in the pharynx (connects the mouth to the oesophagus )  

Pharyngitis
Inflammation of the pharynx (connects the mouth to the oesophagus)  

Pharynx
Connects the mouth to the oesophagus  

Phimosis
Contraction of the orifice of the prepuce (foreskin of penis), usually treated by circumcision  

Phlebitis
Inflammation of the veins caused by coagulation of the blood  

Phlegmon
Rapid suppurating inflammation with formation of a hard mass, heating and pain  

Phlyctenular
Small vesicles containing clear fluid, often associated with the eye  

Photophobia
Dread of light  

Phthisis
Specific name given to tubercular disease of the lungs.  

Phthisis in bulbi
Shrunken non-functional eye resulting from disease or injury.  

Pityriasis
A scaly skin disease  

Pleura
Membranes lining chest cavity and the lungs  

Pleurisy
Inflammation of the pleura - the membranes which surround the lungs and line the cavity of the chest.  

Pleuritis
An alternative name for pleurisy: inflammation of the pleura - the membranes which surround the lungs and line the cavity of the chest.  

Pleurodynia
Pain in the side  

Pleuropneumonia
Pleurisy (inflammation of the membranes lining the lung) combined with pneumonia  

Pneumonia
Inflammation of the lungs 

Pneumothorax
Air in the pleural cavity  

Polioencephalitis & sequela
Inflammation of the grey matter of the brain  

Poliomyelitis & sequela
Inflammation of the grey matter of the spinal cord , leading to paralysis. 

Polycythaemia
An excess of red blood cells  

Polydipsia
Excessive thirst  

Polyp/Polypus
A small simple tumour  

Polyuria
Excessive flow of urine  

Pompholyx
Type of eczema of hands and feet characterised by appearance of tiny blisters  

Porrigo capitus
Skin condition of scalp marked by eruption of pustules.  

Postpharyngeal/Retrophayngeal
Lower throat 

Potts disease
Spinal curvature  

Prematurity
Born before full term (but after 7 months)  

Prepuce
Foreskin of penis  

Prolapse
Condition in which internal organs fall out of place  

Proptosis
Protrusion of the eyeball  

Prurigo
Skin disease marked by very irritable and lasting eruptions.  

Pruritis
Local skin irritation, generally  

Pseudoarthrosis
Inadequate healing of fracture, such that the bone moves inappropriately  

Psoas
A muscle of the side of the abdomen  

Psoriasis
A scaly skin disease of chronic character  

Ptosis
Drooping of upper eyelid  

Pubis
Pubic bone  

Pulmonary
Referring to the lungs 

Purpura
A serious skin disease marked by purple patches, caused by escape of blood into the skin.  

Pyaemia
Blood poisoning caused by absorption of pus and marked by presence of abscesses.  

Pyelitis
Inflammation of the kidney  

Pyelonephritis
Inflammation of the kidney  

Pyloric stenosis
Constriction of the lower opening of the stomach into the intestines  

Pylorus
The lower opening of the stomach into the duodenum (small intestine)  

Pyonephrosis
Kidney infection causing pus in the urine  

Pyopneumothorax
Presence of gas and pus in the cavity between the pleura (the membranes lining the lungs)  

Pyosalpinx
Collection of pus in a fallopian tube (the tube the egg passes through from ovary to uterus)  

Pyrexia
Fever, ill-defined  

Pyuria
Pus in the urine  

Quinsy
Acute inflammation and enlargement of the tonsils  

Radius
One of two bones in lower arm  

Ranula
Cystic tumour under tongue  

Raynauds disease
Gangrene of finger and toe. A neurosis  Vasospasm of arteries which reduces blood flow to fingers and toes. Cause unknown.  

Rectum
Last portion of the large intestine  

Regurgitation
Backward flow of fluid eg of blood through a defective valve or of the stomach contents eg vomiting  

Renal
Relating to the kidney 

Respiration
The act of breathing  

Retained testes
Failure of testes to descend into scrotal sac (Male organs of generation)  

Retinitis
Inflammation of the retina  

Retroperitoneal
Space within the abdominal cavity  

Rheumatic disease
Acute form of rheumatism  An inflammatory disease following a Group A streptococcal infection that can involve the heart, joints, skin, and brain  

Rheumatic fever
Acute form of rheumatism  An inflammatory disease following a Group A streptococcal infection that can involve the heart, joints, skin, and brain  

Rheumatism
A diseased condition of the blood; if acute it is commonly called rheumatic fever, but it may be chronic or muscular. Always accompanied by great pain.  In modern times the term has vague meaning, in common usage referring to inflamed joints or joint pain. 

Rheumatoid arthritis
A chronic inflammatory disorder that may affect many tissues and organs, but principally attacks joints . 

Rhinitis
Inflammation of the nose  Inflammation of the membranes of the inner nose  

Rhinorrhoea
Runny nose  

Rickets
Also known as rachitis. A constitutional disease of childhood marked by curving of the spine or long bones and enlargement of the joints.  It is now known that rickets is most commonly associated with vitamin D or calcium deficiency.  

Ringworm
Circular skin eruption, contagious, often of the scalp, also called Tinea  Fungal skin infection  

Rupture
Hernia  

Sacral meningocele
Protrusion of membranes lining the spine through a defect in lower vertebrae  

Sacroiliac
Refers to a joint within the hip structure  

Sacrum
Lowest division of the spine forming part of the pelvis  

Salpingitis
Inflammation of the fallopian tube (the tube which carries the egg from the ovary to the womb)  

Sarcoma
Fleshy tumour often malignant  

Scabies
The itch, a contagious skin disease due to a parasitic insect  

Scarlet fever & sequela
Also known as scarletina. An infectious fever accompanied by redness of the skin, most common in children, accompanied by desquamation (or peeling) of the skin.  

Schlatters disease
Knee pain associated with rapid growth during adolescence, when damage occurs to the growth plate in the knee-end of the tibia (lower leg bone)  

Sciatic nerve
The large nerve which arises in the lower back, passes through the hip and buttocks to the lower leg.  

Scleritis
Inflammatory disease of the eye ball  

Scleroderma
Chronic disease of the skin causing hardness  

Scleroma
Hardening of the tissues generally, in infants rare but fatal  

Sclerosis
Hardening of the tissues generally, in infants rare but fatal  

Scoliosis
Curving of the spine  

Scrofula
Constitutional debility with tendency to tuberculosis  

Scrotum
Sac which holds testicles  

Scurvy
Also known as scorbutus, a disease marked by dejection, anaemia and haemorrhage and caused by want of fresh meat and vegetables  

Scurvy rickets
Combination of scurvy, condition associated with want of fresh meat and vegetables, and rickets, marked by curving of spine and long bones and painful joints. 

Sebaceous
Realting to glands in the skin 

Seborrhoea
Excessive secretion of the sebaceous glands, located in the skin. 

Sepsis
Putrefaction  

Septic
Which causes putrefaction or the rotting away of living matter.  

Septicaemia
Blood poisoning caused by micro-organisms in the blood, which increase rapidly causing high fever.  

Sequela
Other conditions arising as a result of the original infection  

Shingles
Also called herpes. Acute inflammation of the skin  now known to be caused by the virus Varicella zoster 

Shock
Sudden prostration due to painful impression.  

Sinus
Passage leading from an abscess, or some inner part, to an external opening.  

Sloughing
Throwing off of dead matter, such as skin, eg by ulcers  

Smallpox & sequela
Also known as Variola, infectious fever marked by an eruption of red pimples. 

Soft palate
The soft part of the roof of the mouth  

Somnambulism
Walking in the sleep  

Spengels shoulder
Deformity of the shoulder blade  

Spermatocele
Cyst of testes which contains spermatozoa  

Spina bifida
A congenital malformation of the spine  

Spinal cord
The marrow of the spine  The bundle of nerves which lead from the brain into the rest of the body, and are enclosed within the spinal column  

Spleen
An oval body to left of stomach, which forms and purifies the blood  

Splenomegaly
Enlarged spleen, an oval body to left of stomach, which forms and purifies the blood  

Spondylitis
Inflammation of the spine  

Sporotrichosis
Fungal infection of the skin, which can also affect the lungs, joints and brain  

Sprengels deformity
Deformity of the shoulder blade  

Staphyloma
A protrusion on the back surface of the eye 

Stasis intestine
Decrease o absence of normal muscular contractions of the intestine  

Status lymphaticus
Hyperplasia of lymphatic tissue thought to be responsible for sudden infant death. The disease is no longer recognised as a discrete entity and the term has passed out of use  

Steatorrhoea
Presence of excess fat in the stools  

Stenosis 
Contraction or constriction  

Sternum
The breast bone 

Stills disease
Form of arthritis marked by high fever and rash  

Stomatitis
Inflammation of the mouth often with ulceration  

Stone
Also known as calculus. Most often found in the bladder (Calculus vesica)  

Strabismus
Squint  

Strangulated intestines
A complication of hernia, where the blood supply to the intestines has been compromised  

Strangulated testes
A complication of hernia, where the blood supply to the testes has been compromised  

Strepococcal
Bacterial infection (a 'chain-form' of bacteria)  

Stricture
Contraction  

Stridor
Harsh, crackling sounds in breathing  

Struma/strumous
A swelling associated with scrofula, a constitutional debility with a tendency to tuberculosis  

Strumous dactylitis
Swollen digits (of hands or feet) associated with scrofula, a constitutional debility with a tendency to tuberculosis  

Strumous keratitis
Inflammation of the cornea of the eye, associated with scrofula, a constitutional debility with a tendency to tuberculosis  

Strumous ophthalmia
Swollen eye, associated with scrofula, a constitutional debility with a tendency to tuberculosis  

Strumpells paralysis
A form of paralysis, similar to poliomyelitis  

Subdural
Refers to one of the membranes surrounding the spinal cord 

Supernumerary auricle
Condition in which an additional outer ear appears to be present, either complete or in vestigial form, present at birth 

Supernumerary digits
Presence of more than the normal number of fingers of toes 

Suppression urine
Decreased flow of urine  

Suppurating
Inflammation with production of pus 

Symes amputation
Amputation at the ankle joint  

Syndactyly
Condition in which two or more digits are fused together, present at birth  

Synovitis
Inflammation of one of the membranes lining a joint  

Syphilis & sequela
Venereal disease, specific and contagious, in some cases can be transferred from mother to child during pregnancy.  

Syphilis & sequela congenital
Venereal disease, specific and contagious, in some cases can be transferred from mother to child during pregnancy.  

Tabes
Wasting disease, with several causes including tuberculosis  

Tabes mesenterica
Tubercular disease of the intestines  

Tachycardia
Rapid heart rate  

Taenia
Tapeworm  

Talangiectasis congenital
Small dilated blood vessels near surface of skin, most common on face  

Talipes
Also known as club foot. A turning of the foot in the wrong direction. There are several different forms: the main ones being Talipes valgus: the foot turns outwards; varus, the foot turns inwards; equinus, the heel is lifted from the ground.  The condition can exist at birth or be acquired during life. 

Tenosynovitis
Inflammation of the sheath which surrounds a tendon (the tissue which connects muscle to bone)  

Testes/Testicles
Male sex organs, also referred to as testicles 

Tetanus & sequela
Lock-jaw  Now known to be bacterial in original (Clostridium tetani).  

Tetany
Involuntary contraction of muscles - it is not clear if the Victorian doctors differentiated between tetanus and tetany 

Thorax
The chest cavity holding the lungs and heart  

Thrombosis
Coagulation of the blood to form a clot in a blood vessel which blocks it.  

Thrush
Also known as aphthae. Small white ulcers in the mouth , now known to be caused by a yeast infection. 

Thymus
A gland at the front of the neck  Specialised organ of the immune system which produces immune cells, t-lymphocytes  

Thyroglossal duct
Part of the embryonic thyroid gland which usually closes after birth, but when it does not it can lead to problems. 

Thyroid
Gland in neck  producing hormones which influence metabolism among other activities  

Tibia
One of two small bones in lower leg  

Tic
Sudden repetitive involuntary motor movement or vocalisation  

Tinea
Disease of skin due to vegetable parasite also called ringworm  Fungal skin infection  

Tonsillitis
Inflammation of the tonsils, also known as quinsy. 

Torticollis
Wry-neck , condition in which head is tilted to one side and the chin raised and pointed towards the opposite side  

Toxaemia
A poisoned state of the blood  

Trachea
Windpipe 

Tracheitis
Inflammation of the windpipe  

Tracheotomy
The operation to make an opening into the windpipe and insertion of a tube so the patient can breathe through the tube instead of the mouth  

Trachoma
Infectious eye disease  

Trichinosis
Disease caused by a spiral worm found in swine  

Tubercle/Tubercular
Relating to a form of tuberculosis 

Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is caused by a bacillus, to which there is an inherited tendency  and can affect single or multiple sites in the body. The inherited nature of the disease has been disproved. Tubercular infection was a great scourge of 19th century poor children.  

Tumour
Enlargement due to a permanent growth  

Turbinals
Nasal bones  

Tympanites
Wind-dropsy, a distended abdomen caused by gas in the intestines  

Typhlitis
Inflammation of the lining of part of the intestines (caecum)  

Typhoid fever & sequela
A continued fever usually accompanied by intestinal disturbance and a rose-coloured eruption on the 7th day. Not to be confused with Typhus Fever  Now known to be caused by ingesting water or food carrying the bacteria Salmonella typhii.  

Typhus fever & sequela
Highly infectious fever peculiar to dense , ill-ventilated habitations associated with poverty and bad-air. Now known to be caused by infestation by Rickettsia parasite, spread by mites or fleas. Modern) 

Ulcerative colitis
Inflammation and ulcers of the intestine  

Ulna
One of two small bones in lower arm  

Umbilicus
Belly button 

Undescended testes
Condition in which the testes fail to descend from the abdominal cavity into the scrotal sac  

Uraemia
Presence of urea in the blood, indicative of kidney disease  

Urethra
The canal which carries urine out of the body from the bladder 

Urethritis
Inflammation of the urethra, the canal passes urine out of the body from the bladder  

Urinary tract
The system which produces urine, includes kidneys, bladder and the tubes which connect them together and to the exterior of the body  

urticaria
Nettle rash - a skin disease with eruptions causing great irritation. Generally the result of eating unwholesome food  

Urticaria
Nettle rash - a skin disease with eruptions causing great irritation. Generally the result of eating unwholesome food  

Uvula
The small fleshy body which hangs down at the back of the throat  

Vaccinia & sequela
Vaccinia is the virus used in small pox vaccination, which could cause adverse reactions in its recipients such as rash, fever and headache  

Vaginitis
Inflammation of the vagina (Modern 

Varicella & sequela
Chicken pox  

Venereal disease
Diseases related to sexual intercourse. All are contagious.  

Vertigo
Giddiness  

Volkmans contracture
Permanent flexing of the hand at the wrist  

Von Jakschs anaemia
A chronic form of anemia occurring in young children  

Vulva
Female sex organ 

Vulvitis
Inflammation of the vulva, the female external organs of generation  

Webbed digits
Condition in which the fingers are joined at the base by a web of skin, also called syndactyly  

Wen
Cyst often associated with a sebaceous gland  

Whitlow
Inflammation near a finger nail, with formation of pus.  

Whooping cough & sequela
Also known as Pertussis. A contagious, spasmodic cough, common in childhood in 19th century. The cough ends in a whoop and sometimes causes vomiting.  Despite availability of an effective vaccine it still kills many people each year 

Xanthelasma
Yellow patches on the skin  

Xeroderma
Dryness of the skin  

Xeroderma pigmentosa
A genetic condition in which skin is unable to repair damage by ultraviolet light and patient must avoid excessive exposure to the sun  
